3c. The types of equivocation

3c(1) The same word used literally and figuratively: metaphors
derived from analogies or proportions and from other kinds of
similitude
8 ARISTOTLE: Categories, CH 1 [1a1-6] 5a / Topics, BK VI, CH 2
[139b33-140a6] 192d-193a

9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK V, CH 2 [1138b5-14] 387a,c / Rhetoric, BK III, CH 2
[1404b27-1405b3] 655a-d; CH 3 [1406b5]-CH 4 [1407a16] 657a-d; CH 6
[1408a2-9] 659a; CH 10-11 662c-666b / Poetics, CH 21 [1457b1-33] 693a-c;
CH 25 [1461a8-20] 697c-d

18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK V, par 24 34a-b; BK VI, par 6 36c-d / City of
God, BK XVII, CH 3 450c-451c; BK XX, CH 21, 549d / Christian Doctrine, BK II,
CH 1O 640d-641a; BK III, CH 1 657b; CH 5-37 659d-674d

19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 1, AA 9-10 8d-1Oc; Q 3, A 1, REP
1-5 14b-15b; A 2, REP 1-2 15c-16a; A 3, REP 1 16a-d; Q 13, A 2, ANS and REP 1
63c-64d; A 3 64d-65c; A 6, ANS and REP 2 67d-68c; A 10, CONTRARY
72c-73c; Q 34, A 1, ANS and REP 1,4 185b-187b; Q 67, A 1 349d-350b; A 2,
REP 3 350b-351a; Q 68, A 4, ANS 358b-359b

20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-II, Q 1OO, A 2, REP 2 252b-253a;
PART III, Q 8, A 1, REP 2 756d-757c

23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART I, 55b; 59d; 61c; PART III, 176d-177d; 181d;
193d-195d

25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 422c-423c

28 HARVEY: Motion of the Heart, 267a-b

30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 65b-c

35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK III, CH I, SECT 5 252b-c

35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 144 441d

36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART III, 114b-115b

40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 775c-d [n 173]

42 KANT: Judgement, 547b-548c

53 JAMES: Psychology, 380a-381a; 689a-b

54 FREUD: General Introduction, 510b-c; 512d-513a
8 ARISTOTLE: Categories, CH 1 [1a1-6] 5a / Topics, BK VI, CH 2
[139b33-140a6] 192d-193a
Categories, CH 1 [1a1-6] 5a
1a Things are said to be named ‘equivocally’ when, though they have a
common name, the definition corresponding with the name differs for each.
Thus, a real man and a figure in a picture can both lay claim to the name
‘animal’; yet these are equivocally so named, for, though they have a
common name, the definition corresponding with the name differs for each.
For should any one define in what sense each is an animal, his definition in
the one case will be appropriate to that case only.

Topics, BK VI, CH 2 [139 b33-140a6] 192d-193a
Another rule is, See if he has used a metaphorical expression, as, for
instance, if he has defined knowledge as ‘unsupplantable’, or the earth as a
‘nurse’, or temperance as a ‘harmony’. For a metaphorical expression is
always obscure. It is possible, also, to argue sophistically against the user of
a metaphorical expression as though he had used it in its literal sense: for
the definition stated will not apply to the term defined, e. g. in the case of
temperance: for harmony is always found between notes. Moreover, if
harmony be the genus of temperance, then the same object will occur in
140a two genera of which neither contains the other: for harmony does not
contain virtue, nor virtue harmony. Again, see if he used terms that are
unfamiliar, as when Plato describes the eye as ‘brow-shaded’, or a certain
spider as ‘poison-fanged’, or the marrow as ‘bone-formed’. For an unusual
phrase is always obscure.


9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK V, CH 2 [1138 b5-14] 387a,c / Rhetoric, BK
III, CH 2 [1404b27-1405b3] 655a-d; CH 3 [1406b5]-CH 4 [1407a16]
657a-d; CH 6 [1408a2-9] 659a; CH 10-11 662c-666b / Poetics, CH
21 [1457b1-33] 693a-c; CH 25 [1461a8-20] 697c-d
Ethics, BK V, CH 2 [1138 b5-14] 387a,c
Metaphorically and in virtue of a certain resemblance there is a justice, not
indeed between a man and himself, but between certain parts of him; yet
not every kind of justice but that of master and servant or that of husband
and wife. For these are the ratios in which the part of the soul that has a
rational principle stands to the irrational part; and it is with a view to these
parts that people also think a man can be unjust to himself, viz. because
these parts are liable to suffer something contrary to their respective
desires; there is therefore thought to be a mutual justice between them as
between ruler and ruled.
Let this be taken as our account of justice and the other, i. e. the other
moral, virtues.

Rhetoric, BK III, CH 2 [1404b27-1405b3] 655a-d
Language is composed of nouns and verbs. Nouns are of the various kinds
considered in the treatise on Poetry. 1 Strange words, compound words, and
invented words must be used sparingly and on few occasions: on what
occasions we shall state later. 2 The reason for this restriction has been
already indicated: they depart from what is suitable, in the direction of
excess. In the language of prose, besides the regular and proper terms for
things, metaphorical terms only can be used with advantage. This we gather
from the fact that these two classes of terms, the proper or regular and the
metaphorical—these and no others—are used by everybody in conversation.
We can now see that a good writer can produce a style that is distinguished
without being obtrusive, and is at the same time clear, thus satisfying our
definition of good oratorical prose. Words of ambiguous meaning are chiefly
useful to enable the sophist to mislead his hearers. Synonyms are useful to
the poet, by which I mean words whose ordinary 1405a meaning is the same,
e. g. πορεύεσθαι (advancing) and βαδίζειν (proceeding); these two are ordinary
words and have the same meaning.
In the Art of Poetry, 3 as we have already said, will be found definitions of
these kinds of words; a classification of Metaphors; and mention of the fact
that metaphor is of great value both in poetry and in prose. Prose-writers
must, however, pay specially careful attention to metaphor, because their
other resources are scantier than those of poets. Metaphor, moreover, gives
style clearness, charm, and distinction as nothing else can: and it is not a
thing whose use can be taught by one man to another. Metaphors, like
epithets, must be fitting, which means that they must fairly correspond to
the thing signified: failing this, their inappropriateness will be conspicuous:
the want of harmony between two things is emphasized by their being
placed side by side. It is like having to ask ourselves what dress will suit an
old man; certainly not the crimson cloak that suits a young man. And if you
wish to pay a compliment, you must take your metaphor from something
better in the same line; if to disparage, from something worse. To illustrate
my meaning: since opposites are in the same class, you do what I have
suggested if you say that a man who begs ‘prays’, and a man who prays
‘begs’; for praying and begging are both varieties of asking. So Iphicrates
called Callias a ‘mendicant priest’ instead of a ‘torch-bearer’, and Callias
replied that Iphicrates must be uninitiated or he would have called him not
a ‘mendicant priest’ but a ‘torch-bearer.’ Both are religious titles, but one is

1
  Poetics, 21.
2
  III. 3, 7.
3
  Cf. Poetics, 21, 22.
honourable and the other is not. Again, somebody calls actors ‘hangers-on
of Dionysus’, but they call themselves ‘artists’: each of these terms is a
metaphor, the one intended to throw dirt at the actor, the other to dignify
him. And pirates now call themselves ‘purveyors’. We can thus call a crime a
mistake, or a mistake a crime. We can say that a thief ‘took’ a thing, or that
he ‘plundered’ his victim. An expression like that of Euripides' Telephus,
                  King of the oar, on Mysia's coast he landed, 4
is inappropriate; the word ‘king’ goes beyond the dignity of the subject, and
so the art is not concealed. A metaphor may be amiss because the very
syllables of the words conveying it fail to indicate sweetness of vocal
utterance. Thus Dionysius the Brazen in his elegies calls poetry ‘Calliope's
screech’.5 Poetry and screeching are both, to be sure, vocal utterances. But
the metaphor is bad, because the sounds of ‘screeching’, unlike those of
poetry, are discordant and unmeaning. Further, in using metaphors to give
names to nameless things, we must draw them not from remote but from
kindred and similar things, so that the kinship is clearly perceived as soon
as the words are said. Thus in the celebrated riddle 1405b
      I marked how a man glued bronze with fire to another man's body, 6
the process is nameless; but both it and gluing are a kind of application,
and that is why the application of the cupping-glass is here called a ‘gluing’.

Rhetoric, BK III, CH 3 [1406b5]-CH 4 [1407a16] 657a-d
(4) There remains the fourth region in which bad taste may be shown,
metaphor. Metaphors like other things may be inappropriate. Some are so
because they are ridiculous; they are indeed used by comic as well as tragic
poets. Others are too grand and theatrical; and these, if they are
far-fetched, may also be obscure. For instance, Gorgias talks of ‘events that
are green and full of sap’, and says ‘foul was the deed you sowed and evil
the harvest you reaped.’7 That is too much like poetry. Alcidamas, again,
called philosophy ‘a fortress that threatens the power of law’, and the
Odyssey ‘a goodly looking-glass of human life’, 8 and talked about ‘offering no
such toy to poetry’: all these expressions fail, for the reasons given, to carry
the hearer with them. The address of Gorgias to the swallow, when she had
let her droppings fall on him as she flew overhead, is in the best tragic
manner. He said, ‘Nay, shame, O Philomela’. Considering her as a bird, you
could not call her act shameful; considering her as a girl, you could; and so
it was a good gibe to address her as what she was once and not as what
she is.

4
  Euripides, Telephus, Nauck, p. 583.
5
  Dionysius Chalcus, fr. 7, Bergk, vol. II, p. 264.
6
  Cleobulina, fr. I, Bergk, vol. II, p. 62.
7
  Baiter-Sauppe, op. cit., p. 131; Gorgias.
8
  Ibid., p. 156; Alcidamas.
                                           4
The Simile also is a metaphor; the difference is but slight. When the poet
says of Achilles that he
                            Leapt on the foe as a lion, 9
this is a simile; when he says of him ‘the lion leapt’, it is a metaphor—here,
since both are courageous, he has transferred to Achilles the name of ‘lion’.
Similes are useful in prose as well as in verse; but not often, since they are
of the nature of poetry. They are to be employed just as metaphors are
employed, since they are really the same thing except for the difference
mentioned.
The following are examples of similes. Androtion said of Idrieus that he was
like a terrier let off the chain, that flies at you and bites you—Idrieus too
was savage now that he was let out of his chains. Theodamas compared
Archidamus to an Euxenus who could not do geometry—a proportional
simile, implying that Euxenus is an Archidamus who can do geometry. In
Plato's Republic those who strip the dead are compared to curs which bite
the stones thrown at them but do not touch the thrower, 10 and there is the
simile about the Athenian people, who are compared to a ship's captain
who is strong but a little deaf;11 and the one about poets’ verses, which are
likened to persons who lack beauty but possess youthful freshness—when
the freshness has faded the charm perishes, and so with verses 1407a when
broken up into prose.12 Pericles compared the Samians to children who take
their pap but go on crying; and the Boeotians to holm-oaks, because they
were ruining one another by civil wars just as one oak causes another oak's
fall. Demosthenes said that the Athenian people were like sea-sick men on
board ship. Again, Demosthenes compared the political orators to nurses
who swallow the bit of food themselves and then smear the children's lips
with the spittle. Antisthenes compared the lean Cephisodotus to
frankincense, because it was his consumption that gave one pleasure. All
these ideas may be expressed either as similes or as metaphors; those
which succeed as metaphors will obviously do well also as similes, and
similes, with the explanation omitted, will appear as metaphors. But the
proportional metaphor must always apply reciprocally to either of its
co-ordinate terms. For instance, if a drinking-bowl is the shield of Dionysus,
a shield may fittingly be called the drinking-bowl of Ares.




9
   Cf. Iliad, XX. 164.
10
   Plato, Republic, V. 469.
11
   Ibid., VI. 488.
12
   Cf. Ibid., X. 601.
Rhetoric, BK III, CH 6 [1408a2-9] 659a
(6) And the practice of Antimachus, too, is useful—to describe a thing by
mentioning attributes it does not possess; as he does in talking of
Teumessus—
                    There is a little wind swept knoll . . . 13
A subject can be developed indefinitely along these lines. You may apply
this method of treatment by negation either to good or to bad qualities,
according to which your subject requires. It is from this source that the
poets draw expressions such as the ‘stringless’ or ‘lyreless’ melody, thus
forming epithets out of negations. This device is popular in proportional
metaphors, as when the trumpet’s note is called ‘a lyreless melody’.

Rhetoric, BK III, CH 10-11 662c-666b
                                         10
We may now consider the above points settled, and pass on to say
something about the way to devise lively and taking sayings. Their actual
invention can only come through natural talent or long practice; but this
treatise may indicate the way it is done. We may deal with them by
enumerating the different kinds of them. We will begin by remarking that
we all naturally find it agreeable to get hold of new ideas easily: words
express ideas, and therefore those words are the most agreeable that
enable us to get hold of new ideas. Now strange words simply puzzle us;
ordinary words convey only what we know already; it is from metaphor that
we can best get hold of something fresh. When the poet calls old age ‘a
withered stalk’,14 he conveys a new idea, a new fact, to us by means of the
general notion of ‘lost bloom’, which is common to both things. The similes
of the poets do the same, and therefore, if they are good similes, give an
effect of brilliance. The simile, as has been said before, 15 is a metaphor,
differing from it only in the way it is put; and just because it is longer it is
less attractive. Besides, it does not say outright that ‘this’ is ‘that’, and
therefore the hearer is less interested in the idea. We see, then, that both
speech and reasoning are lively in proportion as they make us seize a new
idea promptly. For this reason people are not much taken either by obvious
arguments (using the word ‘obvious’ to mean what is plain to everybody and
needs no investigation), nor by those which puzzle us when we hear them
stated, but only by those which convey their information to us as soon as
we hear them, provided we had not the information already; or which the
mind only just fails to keep up with. These two kinds do convey to us a sort
of information: but the obvious and the obscure kinds convey nothing,
either at once or later on. It is these qualities, then, that, so far as the
13
   Antimachus, Thebais, fr. 2.
14
   Odyssey, XIV. 213.
15
   III, 4, beginning.
meaning of what is said is concerned, make an argument acceptable. So far
as the style is concerned, it is the antithetical form that appeals to us, e.g.
‘judging that the peace common to all the rest was a war upon their own
private interests’,16 where there is an antithesis between war and peace. It is
also good to use metaphorical words; but the metaphors must not be
far-fetched, or they will be difficult to grasp, nor obvious, or they will have
no effect. The words, too, ought to set the scene before our eyes; for events
ought to be seen in progress rather than in prospect. So we must aim at
these three points: Antithesis, Metaphor, and Actuality.
1411a Of the four kinds of Metaphor the most taking is the proportional kind.
Thus Pericles, for instance, said that the vanishing from their country of the
young men who had fallen in the war was ‘as if the spring were taken out of
the year’. Leptines, speaking of the Lacedaemonians, said that he would not
have the Athenians let Greece ‘lose one of her two eyes’. 17 When Chares was
pressing for leave to be examined upon his share in the Olynthiac war,
Cephisodotus was indignant, saying that he wanted his examination to take
place ‘while he had his fingers upon the people's throat’. The same speaker
once urged the Athenians to march to Euboea, ‘with Miltiades’ decree as
their rations’.18 Iphicrates, indignant at the truce made by the Athenians with
Epidaurus and the neighbouring sea-board, said that they had stripped
themselves of their travelling-money for the journey of war. Peitholaus
called the state-galley ‘the people's big stick’, and Sestos ‘the corn-bin of
the Peiraeus’.19 Pericles bade his countrymen remove Aegina, ‘that eyesore of
the Peiraeus’. And Moerocles said he was no more a rascal than was a
certain respectable citizen he named, ‘whose rascality was worth over thirty
per cent per annum to him, instead of a mere ten like his own’. 20 There is
also the iambic line of Anaxandrides about the way his daughters put off
marrying—
                    My daughters' marriage-bonds are overdue.21
Polyeuctus said of a paralytic man named Speusippus that he could not
keep quiet, ‘though fortune had fastened him in the pillory of disease’.
Cephisodotus called warships ‘painted millstones’.22 Diogenes the Dog called
taverns ‘the mess-rooms of Attica’. Aesion said that the Athenians had
‘emptied’ their town into Sicily: this is a graphic metaphor. 23 ‘Till all Hellas
shouted aloud’ may be regarded as a metaphor, and a graphic one again.
Cephisodotus bade the Athenians take care not to hold too many

16
   Isocrates, Philippus, 73.
17
   Baiter-Sauppe, op. cit., p. 250; Leptines.
18
   Baiter-Sauppe, p. 220; Cephisodotus.
19
   Ibid., p. 318; Peitholaus.
20
   Ibid., 275 (Moerocles).
21
   Anaxandrides; Kock, Com. Att. Fragm., II, p. 162.
22
   Baiter-Sauppe, p. 220; Cephisodotus.
23
   Ibid., p. 318 (Aesion).
‘parades’.24 Isocrates used the same word of those who ‘parade’ at the
national festivals. 25 Another example occurs in the Funeral Speech: 26 ‘It is
fitting that Greece should cut off her hair beside the tomb of those who fell
at Salamis, since her freedom and their valour are buried in the same grave.’
Even if the speaker here had only said that it was right to weep when valour
was being buried in their grave, it would have been a metaphor, and a
graphic one; but the coupling of ‘their 1411b valour’ and ‘her freedom’
presents a kind of antithesis as well. ‘The course of my words’, said
Iphicrates, ‘lies straight through the middle of Chares’ deeds’: 27 this is a
proportional metaphor, and the phrase ‘straight through the middle’ makes
it graphic. The expression ‘to call in one danger to rescue us from another’
is a graphic metaphor. Lycoleon said, defending Chabrias, ‘They did not
respect even that bronze statue of his that intercedes for him yonder’. 28
This was a metaphor for the moment, though it would not always apply; a
vivid metaphor, however; Chabrias is in danger, and his statue intercedes for
him—that lifeless yet living thing which records his services to his country.
‘Practising in every way littleness of mind’ 29 is metaphorical, for practising a
quality implies increasing it. So is ‘God kindled our reason to be a lamp
within our soul’,30 for both reason and light reveal things. So is ‘we are not
putting an end to our wars, but only postponing them’, 31 for both literal
postponement and the making of such a peace as this apply to future
action. So is such a saying as ‘This treaty is a far nobler trophy than those
we set up on fields of battle; they celebrate small gains and single
successes; it celebrates our triumph in the war as a whole’; 32 for both
trophy and treaty are signs of victory. So is ‘A country pays a heavy
reckoning in being condemned by the judgement of mankind’, 33 for a
reckoning is damage deservedly incurred.
                                        11
It has already been mentioned that liveliness is got by using the
proportional type of metaphor and by being graphic (i.e. making your
hearers see things). We have still to explain what we mean by their ‘seeing
things’, and what must be done to effect this. By ‘making them see things’ I
mean using expressions that represent things as in a state of activity. Thus,
to say that a good man is ‘four-square’ 34 is certainly a metaphor; both the

24
   Ibid., p. 220; Cephisodotus.
25
   Isocrates, Philippus, 12.
26
   Epitaphius (by Lysias?), 60.
27
   Baiter-Sauppe, op. cit., p. 191; under Lysias.
28
   Ibid., 180.
29
   Isocrates, Paneg., 151.
30
   Anonymous.
31
   Isocrates, Paneg., 172.
32
   Ibid., 180.
33
   Anonymous: cf. Isocrates, De Pace, 120.
34
   Simonides, fr. 5, Bergk.
good man and the square are perfect; but the metaphor does not suggest
activity. On the other hand, in the expression ‘with his vigour in full bloom’ 35
there is a notion of activity; and so in ‘But you must roam as free as a
sacred victim’;36 and in
                 Thereat up sprang the Hellenes to their feet, 37
where ‘up sprang’ gives us activity as well as metaphor, for it at once
suggests swiftness. So with Homer's common practice of giving
metaphorical life to lifeless things: all such passages are distinguished by
the effect of activity they convey. Thus,
      Downward anon to the valley rebounded the boulder remorseless;38
and
                             The ⟨bitter⟩ arrow flew;39
and
                                Flying on eagerly;40
and
   1412a Stuck in the earth, still panting to feed on the flesh of the heroes; 41
and
   And the point of the spear in its fury drove full through his breastbone.42
In all these examples the things have the effect of being active because
they are made into living beings; shameless behaviour and fury and so on
are all forms of activity. And the poet has attached these ideas to the things
by means of proportional metaphors: as the stone is to Sisyphus, so is the
shameless man to his victim. In his famous similes, too, he treats inanimate
things in the same way:
    Curving and crested with white, host following host without ceasing. 43
Here he represents everything as moving and living; and activity is
movement.
Metaphors must be drawn, as has been said already,44 from things that are
related to the original thing, and yet not obviously so related—just as in
philosophy also an acute mind will perceive resemblances even in things far
apart. Thus Archytas said that an arbitrator and an altar were the same,
since the injured fly to both for refuge. Or you might say that an anchor and
an overhead hook were the same, since both are in a way the same, only
the one secures things from below and the other from above. And to speak


35
   Isocrates, Philippus, 10.
36
   Ibid., 127.
37
   Euripides, Iphigenia in Aulis, 80.
38
   Odyssey, XI. 598.
39
   Iliad, XIII. 587.
40
    Ibid., IV. 126.
41
   Ibid., XI. 574.
42
   Ibid., XV. 542.
43
   Ibid., XIII. 799.
44
   III. 10 (1410b 32).
of states as ‘levelled’ 45 is to identify two widely different things, the equality
of a physical surface and the equality of political powers.
Liveliness is specially conveyed by metaphor, and by the further power of
surprising the hearer; because the hearer expected something different, his
acquisition of the new idea impresses him all the more. His mind seems to
say, ‘Yes, to be sure; I never thought of that’. The liveliness of epigrammatic
remarks is due to the meaning not being just what the words say: as in the
saying of Stesichorus that ‘the cicalas will chirp to themselves on the
ground’.46 Well-constructed riddles are attractive for the same reason; a
new idea is conveyed, and there is metaphorical expression. So with the
‘novelties’ of Theodorus. In these the thought is startling, and, as Theodorus
puts it, does not fit in with the ideas you already have. They are like the
burlesque words that one finds in the comic writers. The effect is produced
even by jokes depending upon changes of the letters of a word; this too is a
surprise. You find this in verse as well as in prose. The word which comes is
not what the hearer imagined: thus
        Onward he came, and his feet were shod with his—chilblains, 47
where one imagined the word would be ‘sandals’. But the point should be
clear the moment the words are uttered. Jokes made by altering the letters
of a word consist in meaning, not just what you say, but something that
gives a twist to the word used; e.g. the remark of Theodorus about Nicon
the harpist Θρᾷττ’ εἶ σύ (‘you Thracian slavey’), where he pretends to mean
θράττεις σύ (‘you harp-player’), and surprises us when we find he 1412b
means something else. So you enjoy the point when you see it, though the
remark will fall flat unless you are aware that Nicon is Thracian. Or again:
βούλει αὐτὸν πέρσαι.48 In both these cases the saying must fit the facts. This
is also true of such lively remarks as the one to the effect that to the
Athenians their empire (ἀρχή) of the sea was not the beginning (ἀρχή) of
their troubles, since they gained by it. Or the opposite one of Isocrates, that
their empire (ἀρχή) was the beginning (ἀρχή) of their troubles. Either way,
the speaker says something unexpected, the soundness of which is
thereupon recognized. There would be nothing clever is saying ‘empire is
empire’. Isocrates means more than that, and uses the word with a new
meaning. So too with the former saying, which denies that ἀρχή in one
sense was ἀρχή in another sense. In all these jokes, whether a word is used
in a second sense or metaphorically, the joke is good if it fits the facts. For
instance, Ανάσχετος (proper name) οὐκ ἀνασχετός:49 where you say that what



45
   Cf. Isocrates, Philippus, 40.
46
   Cf. 11. 21, above.
47
   Anonymous.
48
   “You wish [or, do you wish] to persecute him.”
49
   “Baring is past bearing.”
is so-and-so in one sense is not so-and-so in another; well, if the man is
unpleasant, the joke fits the facts. Again, take—
            Thou must not be a stranger stranger than Thou should'st. 50
Do not the words ‘thou must not be’, &c., amount to saying that the stranger
must not always be strange? Here again is the use of one word in different
senses. Of the same kind also is the much-praised verse of Anaxandrides:
                           Death is most fit before you do
                     Deeds that would make death fit for you. 51
This amounts to saying ‘it is a fit thing to die when you are not fit to die’, or
‘it is a fit thing to die when death is not fit for you’, i.e. when death is not
the fit return for what you are doing. The type of language employed is the
same in all these examples; but the more briefly and antithetically such
sayings can be expressed, the more taking they are, for antithesis impresses
the new idea more firmly and brevity more quickly. They should always have
either some personal application or some merit of expression, if they are to
be true without being commonplace—two requirements not always satisfied
simultaneously. Thus ‘a man should die having done no wrong’ is true but
dull: ‘the right man should marry the right woman’ 52 is also true but dull.
No, there must be both good qualities together, as in ‘it is fitting to die
when you are not fit for death’. The more a saying has these qualities, the
livelier it appears: if, for instance, its wording is metaphorical, metaphorical
in the right way, antithetical, and balanced, and at the same time it gives an
idea of activity.
Successful similes also, as has been said above, 53 are in a sense metaphors,
since they always involve two relations like the proportional metaphor. Thus:
a shield, we say, is 1413a the ‘drinking-bowl of Ares’, 54 and a bow is the
“chordless lyre’.55 This way of putting a metaphor is not ‘simple’, as it would
be if we called the bow a lyre or the shield a drinking-bowl. There are
‘simple’ similes also: we may say that a flute-player is like a monkey, or that
a short-sighted man's eyes are like a lamp-flame with water dropping on it,
since both eyes and flame keep winking. A simile succeeds best when it is a
converted metaphor, for it is possible to say that a shield is like the
drinking-bowl of Ares, or that a ruin is like a house in rags, and to say that
Niceratus is like a Philoctetes stung by Pratys—the simile made by
Thrasymachus when he saw Niceratus, who had been beaten by Pratys in a
recitation competition, still going about unkempt and unwashed. It is in
these respects that poets fail worst when they fail, and succeed best when
they succeed, i.e. when they give the resemblance pat, as in
50
   Kock, Com., Fragm., III. 209.
51
   Anaxandrides, ibid., II, p. 161.
52
   Ibid., III, p. 447; fr. adesp. 206.
53
   III. 4 and 10.
54
   Timotheus, fr. 16, Bergk. Cf. III. 4, end.
55
   Bergk4, fr. adesp. 127, vol. III. p. 728.
                    Those legs of his curl just like parsley leaves; 56
and
              Just like Philammon struggling with his punchball.57
These are all similes; and that similes are metaphors has been stated often
already.58
Proverbs, again, are metaphors from one species to another. 59 Suppose, for
instance, a man to start some undertaking in hope of gain and then to lose
by it later on, ‘Here we have once more the man of Carpathus and his hare’,
says he. For both alike went through the said experience.
It has now been explained fairly completely how liveliness is secured and
why it has the effect it has. Successful hyperboles are also metaphors, e.g.
the one about the man with a black eye, ‘you would have thought he was a
basket of mulberries’; here the ‘black eye’ is compared to a mulberry
because of its colour, the exaggeration lying in the quantity of mulberries
suggested. The phrase ‘like so-and-so’ may introduce a hyperbole under the
form of a simile. Thus
               Just like Philammon struggling with his punchball
is equivalent to ‘you would have thought he was Philammon struggling with
his punchball’; and
                  Those legs of his curl just like parsley leaves
is equivalent to ‘his legs are so curly that you would have thought they were
not legs but parsley leaves’. Hyperboles are for young men to use; they
show vehemence of character; and this is why angry people use them more
than other people.
   Not though he gave me as much as the dust or the sands of the sea . . . 60
             But her, the daughter of Atreus’ son, I never will marry,
           Nay, not though she were fairer than Aphrodite the Golden,
                         Defter of hand than Athene . . . 61
1413b (The Attic orators are particularly fond of this method of speech.)
Consequently it does not suit an elderly speaker.

Poetics, CH 21 [1457b1-33] 693a-c
1457b Whatever its structure, a Noun must always be either (1) the ordinary
word for the thing, or (2) a strange word, or (3) a metaphor, or (4) an
ornamental word, or (5) a coined word, or (6) a word lengthened out, or (7)
curtailed, or (8) altered in form. By the ordinary word I mean that in general
use in a country; and by a strange word, one in use elsewhere. So that the
same word may obviously be at once strange and ordinary, though not in
56
   Kock, Com. Att. Fragm., III. fr. adesp. 207, p. 448.
57
   Ibid, III, fr. 208, p. 448.
58
   III. 4, 10, 11.
59
   Cf. Poetics, 21.
60
   Iliad, IX. 385.
61
   Ibid., IX. 388-90.
reference to the same people; οίγυνον, for instance, is an ordinary word in
Cyprus, and a strange word with us. Metaphor consists in giving the thing a
name that belongs to something else; the transference being either from
genus to species, or from species to genus, or from species to species, or
on grounds of analogy. That from genus to species is exemplified in ‘Here
stands my ship’;62 for lying at anchor is the ‘standing’ of a particular kind of
thing. That from species to genus in ‘Truly ten thousand good deeds has
Ulysses wrought’,63 where ‘ten thousand’, which is a particular large number,
is put in place of the generic ‘a large number’. That from species to species
in ‘Drawing the life with the bronze’, 64 and in ‘Severing with the enduring
bronze’;65 where the poet uses ‘draw’ in the sense of ‘sever’ and ‘sever’ in
that of ‘draw’, both words meaning to ‘take away’ something. That from
analogy is possible whenever there are four terms so related that the
second (B) is to the first (A), as the fourth (D) to the third (C); for one may
then metaphorically put D in lieu of B, and B in lieu of D. Now and then, too,
they qualify the metaphor by adding on to it that to which the word it
supplants is relative. Thus a cup (B) is in relation to Dionysus (A) what a
shield (D) is to Ares (C). The cup accordingly will be metaphorically
described as the ‘shield of Dionysus’ (D＋A), and the shield as the ’cup of
Ares’66 (B＋C). Or to take another instance: As old age (D) is to life (C), so is
evening (B) to day (A). One will accordingly describe evening (B) as the ‘old
age of the day’ (D＋A)—or by the Empedoclean equivalent; and old age (D)
as the ‘evening’67 or ‘sunset of life’68 (B＋C). It may be that some of the
terms thus related have no special name of their own, but for all that they
will be metaphorically described in just the same way. Thus to cast forth
seed-corn is called ‘sowing’; but to cast forth its flame, as said of the sun,
has no special name. This nameless act (B), however, stands in just the
same relation to its object, sunlight (A), as sowing (D) to the seed-corn (C).
Hence the expression in the poet, ‘sowing around a god-created flame’ (D＋
A). There is also another form of qualified metaphor. Having given the thing
the alien name, one may by a negative addition deny of it one of the
attributes naturally associated with its new name. An instance of this would
be to call the shield not the ‘cup of Ares’, as in the former case, but a ‘cup
that holds no wine’. . . .




62
   Odyssey, I. 185, XXIV. 308.
63
   Iliad., II. 272.
64
   Empedocles, Καθαρμοί; cf. fr. 143, Diels.
65
   Empedocles, Καθαρμοί; cf. fr. 143, Diels.
66
   Timotheus, fr. 22, Wilamowitz.
67
   Alexis, fr. 228, Kock.
68
   Plato, Laws, 770.
Poetics, CH 25 [1461a8-20] 697c-d
III. Other criticisms one must meet by considering the language of the poet:
(1) by the assumption of a strange word in a passage like οὐρῆας μὲν
πρῶτον,69 where by οὐρῆας Homer may perhaps mean not mules but
sentinels. And in saying of Dolon, ὄς ῥ’ ἦ τοι εἶδος μὲν ἔην κακός,70 his meaning
may perhaps be, not that Dolon’s body was deformed, but that his face was
ugly, as εὐειδής is the Cretan word for handsome-faced. So, too, ζωρότερον δὲ
κέραιε71 may mean not ‘mix the wine stronger’, as though for topers, but ‘mix
it quicker’. (2) Other expressions in Homer may be explained as
metaphorical; e.g. in ἄλλοι μέν ῥα θεοί τε καὶ ἀνέρες εὗδον ⟨ἄπαντες⟩ παννύχιοι,72
as compared with what he tells us at the same time, ἦ τοι ὄτ’ ἐς πεδίον τὸ
Τρωικὸν ἀθρήσειεν, αὐλῶν συρίγγων †τε ὁμαδόν†,73 the word ἄπαντες ‘all’, is
metaphorically put for ‘many’, since ‘all’ is a species of ‘many’. So also his
οἴη δ’ ἄμμορος74 is metaphorical, the best known standing ’alone’.


18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK V, par 24 34a-b; BK VI, par 6
36c-d / City of God, BK XVII, CH 3 450c-451c; BK XX, CH 21, 549d
/ Christian Doctrine, BK II, CH 1O 640d-641a; BK III, CH 1 657b; CH
5-37 659d-674d
Confessions, BK V, par 24 34a-b
[XIV] 24. For though I took no pains to learn what he spake, but only to hear
how he spake (for that empty care alone wa left me, despairing of a way
open for man to Thee); yet, together with the words which I would choose,
came also into my mind the things which I would refuse; for I could not
separate them. And while I opened my heart to admit “how eloquently he
spake,” there also entered “how truly he spake”; but this by degrees. For
first, these things also had now begun to appear to me capable of defence;
and the Catholic faith, for which I had thought nothing could be said against
the Manichees’ objections, I now thought might be maintained without
shamelessness; especially after I had heard one or two places of the Old
Testament resolved, and oft-times “in a figure,” which when I understood
literally. I was “slain” spiritually.75 Very many places then of those books
having been explained, I now blamed my despair in believing that no answer
could be given to such as hated and scoffed at the Law and the Prophets.
Yet did I not therefore then see that the Catholic way was to be held
because it also could find learned maintainers, who could at large and with
69
    Iliad, I. 50.
70
   Ibid., X. 316.
71
   Ibid. IX. 202.
72
   Cf. Ibid., X. 1, II. 1.
73
   Ibid., X. 11-13.
74
   Ibid., XVIII. 489 = Odyssey, V. 275.
75
   I Cor. 113. 12; II Cor. 3. 6.
some shew of reason answer objections; nor that what I held was therefore
to be condemned because both sides could be maintained. For the Catholic
cause seemed to me in such sort not vanquished, as still not as yet to be
victorious.

Confessions, BK VI, par 6 36c-d
6. I joyed also that the old Scriptures of the Law and the Prophets were laid
before me, not now to be perused with that eye to which before they
seemed absurd, when I reviled Thy holy ones for so thinking, whereas
indeed they thought not so: and with joy I heard Ambrose in his sermons to
the people oftentimes most diligently recommend this text for a rule, “The
letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life”; 76 whilst he drew aside the mystic
veil, laying open spiritually what according to the “letter” seemed to teach
something unsound; teaching herein nothing that offended me, though he
taught what I knew not as yet whether it were true. For I kept my heart
from assenting to anything, fearing to fall headlong; but by hanging in
suspense I was the worse killed. For I wished to be as assured of the things
I saw not as I was that seven and three are ten. For I was not so mad as to
think that even this could not be comprehended; but I desired to have other
things as clear as this, whether things corporeal, which were not present to
my senses, or spiritual, whereof I knew not how to conceive, except
corporeally. And by believing might I have been cured, that so the eyesight
of my soul, being cleared, might in some way be directed to Thy truth,
which abideth always, and in no part faileth. But as it happens that one who
has tried a bad physician fears to trust himself with a good one, so was it
with the health of my soul, which could not be healed but by believing, and,
lest it should believe falsehoods, refused to be cured; resisting Thy hands,
Who hast prepared the medicines of faith, and hast applied them to the
diseases of the whole world, and given unto them so great authority.

City of God, BK XVII, CH 3 450c-451c
Chap. 3. Of the three-fold meaning of the prophecies, which are to be
referred now to the earthly, now to the heavenly Jerusalem, and now again
to both
Wherefore just as that divine oracle to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all
the other prophetic signs or sayings which are given in the earlier sacred
writings, so also the other prophecies from this time of the kings pertain
partly to the nation of Abraham's flesh and partly to that seed of his in
which all nations are blessed as fellow-heirs of Christ by the New
Testament, to the possessing of eternal life and the kingdom of the
heavens. Therefore they pertain partly to the bond maid who gendereth to

76
     II Cor. 3. 6.
bondage, that is, the earthly Jerusalem, which is in bondage with her
children; but partly to the free city of God, that is, the true Jerusalem
eternal in the heavens, whose children are all those that live according to
God in the earth: but there are some things among them which are
understood to pertain to both—to the bond maid properly, to the free
woman figuratively.77
Therefore prophetic utterances of three kinds are to be found; forasmuch
as there are some relating to the earthly Jerusalem, some to the heavenly,
and some to both. I think it proper to prove what I say by examples. The
prophet Nathan was sent to convict king David of heinous sin, and predict
to him what future evils should be consequent on it. Who can question that
this and the like pertain to the terrestrial city, whether publicly, that is, for
the safety or help of the people, or privately, when there are given forth for
each one's private good divine utterances whereby something of the future
may be known for the use of temporal life? But where we read, “Behold, the
days come, saith the Lord, that I will make for the house of Israel, and for
the house of Judah, a new testament: not according to the testament that I
settled for their fathers in the day when I laid hold of their hand to lead
them out of the land of Egypt; because they continued not in my
testament, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. For this is the
testament that I will make for the house of Israel: after those days, saith
the Lord, I will give my laws in their mind, and will write them upon their
hearts, and I will see to them; and I will be to them a God, and they shall
be to me a people”; 78 without doubt this is prophesied to the Jerusalem
above, whose reward is God Himself, and whose chief and entire good it is
to have Him, and to be His. But this pertains to both, that the city of God is
called Jerusalem, and that it is prophesied the house of God shall be in it;
and this prophecy seems to be fulfilled when king Solomon builds that
most noble temple. For these things both happened in the earthly
Jerusalem, as history shows, and were types of the heavenly Jerusalem.
And this kind of prophecy, as it were compacted and commingled of both
the others in the ancient canonical books, containing historical narratives, is
of very great significance, and has exercised and exercises greatly the wits
of those who search holy writ. For example, what we read of historically as
predicted and fulfilled in the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, we
must also inquire the allegorical meaning of, as it is to be fulfilled in the
seed of Abraham according to faith. And so much is this the case that some
have thought there is nothing in these books either foretold and effected, or
effected although not foretold, that does not insinuate something else
which is to be referred by figurative signification to the city of God on high,
and to her children who are pilgrims in this life. But if this be so, then the
77
     Gal. 4. 22-31.
78
     Heb. 8. 8-10.
utterances of the prophets, or rather the whole of those Scriptures that are
reckoned under the title of the Old Testament, will be not of three, but of
two different kinds. For there will be nothing there which pertains to the
terrestrial Jerusalem only, if whatever is there said and fulfilled of or
concerning her signifies something which also refers by allegorical
prefiguration to the celestial Jerusalem; but there will be only two kinds,
one that pertains to the free Jerusalem, the other to both. But just as, I
think, they err greatly who are of opinion that none of the records of affairs
in that kind of writings mean anything more than that they so happened, so
I think those very daring who contend that the whole gist of their contents
lies in allegorical significations. Therefore I have said they are three-fold,
not two-fold. Yet, in holding this opinion, I do not blame those who may be
able to draw out of everything there a spiritual meaning, only saving, first of
all, the historical truth. For the rest, what believer can doubt that those
things are spoken vainly which are such that, whether said to have been
done or to be yet to come, they do not beseem either human or divine
affairs? Who would not recall these to spiritual understanding if he could,
or confess that they should be recalled by him who is able?

City of God, BK XX, CH 21, 549d
Behold, I will make Jerusalem an exultation, and my people a joy. And I will
exult in Jerusalem, and joy in my people; and the voice of weeping shall be
no more heard in her”;79 and other promises, which some endeavour to
refer to carnal enjoyment during the thousand years. For, in the manner of
prophecy, figurative and literal expressions are mingled, so that a serious
mind may, by useful and salutary effort, reach the spiritual sense; but
carnal sluggishness, or the slowness of an uneducated and undisciplined
mind, rests in the superficial letter, and thinks there is nothing beneath to
be looked for. But let this be enough regarding the style of those prophetic
expressions just quoted. And now, to return to their interpretation. When he
had said, “And your bones shall rise up like a herb,” in order to show that it
was the resurrection of the good, though a bodily resurrection, to which he
alluded, he added, “And the hand of the Lord shall be known by His
worshippers.” What is this but the hand of Him who distinguishes those who
worship from those who despise Him? Regarding these the context
immediately adds, “And He shall threaten the contumacious,” or, as another
translator has it, “the unbelieving.”

Christian Doctrine, BK II, CH 1O 640d-641a
Chap. 10. Unknown or ambiguous signs prevent Scripture from being
understood

79
     Isa. 65. 17-19.
15. Now there are two causes which prevent what is written from being
understood: its being veiled either under unknown, or under ambiguous
signs. Signs are either proper or figurative. They are called proper when they
are used to point our the objects they were designed to point out, as we say
bos when we mean an ox, because all men who with us use the Latin
tongue call it by this name. Signs are figurative when the things themselves
which we indicate by the proper names are used to signify something else,
as we say bos, and understand by that syllable the ox, which is ordinarily
called by that name; but then further by that ox understand a preacher of
the gospel, as Scripture signifies, according to the apostle’s explanation,
when it says: “Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn.” 80

Christian Doctrine, BK III, CH 1 657b
Chap. 1. Summary of the foregoing books, and scope of that which follows
1. The man who fears God seeks diligently in Holy Scripture for a knowledge
of His will. And when he has become meek through piety, so as to have no
love of strife; when furnished also with a knowledge of languages, so as not
to be stopped by unknown words and forms of speech, and with the
knowledge of certain necessary objects, so as not to be ignorant of the
force and nature of those which are used figuratively; and assisted, besides,
by accuracy in the texts, which has been secured by skill and care in the
matter of correction; when thus prepared, let him proceed to the
examination and solution of the ambiguities of Scripture. And that he may
not be led astray by ambiguous signs, so far as I can give him instruction (it
may happen, however, that either from the greatness of his intellect, or the
greater clearness of the light he enjoys, he shall laugh at the methods I am
going to point out as childish), but yet, as I was going to say, so far as I can
give instruction, let him who is in such a state of mind that he can be
instructed by me know, that the ambiguity of Scripture lies either in proper
words or in metaphorical, classes which I have already described in the
second book.81

Christian Doctrine, BK III, CH 5-37 659d-674d
Chap. 5. It is a wretched slavery which takes the figurative expressions of
Scripture in a literal sense
9.But the ambiguities of metaphorical words, about which I am next to
speak, demand no ordinary care and diligence. In the first place, we must
beware of taking a figurative expression literally. For the saying of the
apostle applies in this case too: “The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life.”
82
   For when what is said figuratively is taken as if it were said literally, it is
80
   I Cor. 9. 9.
81
   See BK. II. Chap. 10.
82
   II Cor. 3. 6.
understood in a carnal manner. And nothing is more fittingly called the
death of the soul than when that in it which raises it above the brutes, the
intelligence namely, is put in subjection to the flesh by a blind adherence to
the letter. For he who follows the letter takes figurative words as if they
were proper, and does not carry out what is indicated by a proper word into
its secondary signification; but, if he hears of the Sabbath, for example,
thinks of nothing but the one day out of seven which recurs in constant
succession; and when he hears of a sacrifice, does not carry his thoughts
beyond the customary offerings of victims from the flock, and of the fruits
of the earth. Now it is surely a miserable slavery of the soul to take signs
for things, and to be unable to lift the eye of the mind above what is
corporeal and created, that it may drink in eternal light.
Chap. 6. Utility of the bondage of the Jews
10. This bondage, however, in the case of the Jewish people, differed widely
from what it was in the case of the other nations; because, though the
former were in bondage to temporal things, it was in such a way that in all
these the One God was put before their minds. And although they paid
attention to the signs of spiritual realities in place of the realities
themselves, not knowing to what the signs referred, still they had this
conviction rooted in their minds, that in subjecting themselves to such a
bondage they were doing the pleasure of the one invisible God of all. And
the apostle describes this bondage as being like to that of boys under the
guidance of a schoolmaster. 83 And those who clung obstinately to such
signs could not endure our Lord’s neglect of them when the time for their
revelation had come; and hence their leaders brought it as a charge against
Him that He healed on the Sabbath, and the people, clinging to these signs
as if they were realities, could not believe that one who refused to observe
them in the way the Jews did was God, or came from God. But those who
did believe, from among whom the first Church at Jerusalem was formed,
showed clearly how great an advantage it had been to be so guided by the
schoolmaster that signs, which had been for a season imposed on the
obedient, fixed the thoughts of those who observed them on the worship of
the One God Who made heaven and earth. These men, because they had
been very near to spiritual things (for even in the temporal and carnal
offerings and types, though they did not clearly apprehend their spiritual
meaning, they had learnt to adore the One Eternal God), were filled with
such a measure of the Holy Spirit that they sold all their goods, and laid
their price at the apostles’ feet to be distributed among the needy, 84 and
consecrated themselves wholly to God as a new temple, of which the old
temple they were serving was but the earthly type.


83
     Gal. 3. 24.
84
     Acts, 4. 34, 35.
11. Now it is not recorded that any of the Gentile churches did this, because
men who had for their gods idols made with hands had not been so near to
spiritual things.
Chap. 7. The useless bondage of the Gentiles
And if ever any of them endeavoured to make it out that their idols were
only signs, yet still they used them in reference to the worship and
adoration of the creature. What difference does it make to me, for instance,
that the image of Neptune is not itself to be considered a god, but only as
representing the wide ocean, and all the other waters besides that spring
out of fountains? As it is described by a poet of theirs, 85 who says, if I
recollect aright, “Thou, Father Neptune, whose hoary temples are wreathed
with the resounding sea, whose beard is the mighty ocean flowing forth
unceasingly, and whose hair is the winding rivers.” This husk shakes its
rattling stones within a sweet covering, and yet it is not food for men, but
for swine. He who knows the gospel knows what I mean. 86 What profit is it
to me, then, that the image of Neptune is used with a reference to this
explanation of it, unless indeed the result be that I worship neither? For any
statue you like to take is as much god to me as the wide ocean. I grant,
however, that they who make gods of the works of man have sunk lower
than they who make gods of the works of God. But the command is that we
should love and serve the One God, who is the Maker of all those things,
the images of which are worshipped by the heathen either as gods, or as
signs and representations of gods. If, then, to take a sign which has been
established for a useful end instead of the thing itself which it was
designed to signify, is bondage to the flesh, how much more so is it to take
signs intended to represent useless things for the things themselves! For
even if you go back to the very things signified by such signs, and engage
your mind in the worship of these, you will not be anything the more free
from the burden and the livery of bondage to the flesh.
Chap. 8. The Jews liberated from their bondage in one way, the Gentiles in
another
12. Accordingly the liberty that comes by Christ took those whom it found
under bondage to useful signs, and who were (so to speak) near to it, and,
interpreting the signs to which they were in bondage, set them free by
raising them to the realities of which these were signs. And out of such
were formed the churches of the saints of Israel. Those, on the other hand,
whom it found in bondage to useless signs, it not only freed from their
slavery to such signs, but brought to nothing and cleared out of the way all
these signs themselves, so that the Gentiles were turned from the
corruption of a multitude of false gods, which Scripture frequently and
justly speaks of as fornication, to the worship of the One God: not that they
85
     Claudian.
86
     Luke, 15. 16.
might now fall into bondage to signs of a useful kind, but rather that they
might exercise their minds in the spiritual understanding of such.
Chap. 9. Who is in bondage to signs, and who not
13. Now he is in bondage to a sign who uses, or pays homage to, any
significant object without knowing what it signifies: he, on the other hand,
who either uses or honours a useful sign divinely appointed, whose force
and significance he understands, does not honour the sign which is seen
and temporal, but that to which all such signs refer. Now such a man is
spiritual and free even at the time of his bondage, when it is not yet
expedient to reveal to carnal minds those signs by subjection to which their
carnality is to be overcome. To this class of spiritual persons belonged the
patriarchs and the prophets, and all those among the people of Israel
through whose instrumentality the Holy Spirit ministered unto us the aids
and consolations of the Scriptures. But at the present time, after that the
proof of our liberty has shone forth so clearly in the resurrection of our
Lord, we are not oppressed with the heavy burden of attending even to
those signs which we now understand, but our Lord Himself and apostolic
practice have handed down to us a few rites in place of many, and these at
once very easy to perform, most majestic in their significance, and most
sacred in the observance; such, for example, as the sacrament of baptism,
and the celebration of the body and blood of the Lord. And as soon as any
one looks upon these observances he knows to what they refer, and so
reveres them not in carnal bondage, but in spiritual freedom. Now, as to
follow the letter, and to take signs for the things that are signified by them,
is a mark of weakness and bondage; so to interpret signs wrongly is the
result of being misled by error. He, however, who does not understand what
a sign signifies, but yet knows that it is a sign, is not in bondage. And it is
better even to be in bondage to unknown but useful signs than, by
interpreting them wrongly, to draw the neck from under the yoke of
bondage only to insert it in the coils of error.
Chap. 10. How we are to discern whether a phrase is figurative
14. But in addition to the foregoing rule, which guards us against taking a
metaphorical form of speech as if it were literal, we must also pay heed to
that which tells us not to take a literal form of speech as if it were
figurative. In the first place, then, we must show the way to find out
whether a phrase is literal or figurative. And the way is certainly as follows:
Whatever there is in the word of God that cannot, when taken literally, be
referred either to purity of life or soundness of doctrine, you may set down
as figurative. Purity of life has reference to the love of God and one's
neighbour; soundness of doctrine to the knowledge of God and one's
neighbour. Every man, moreover, has hope in his own conscience, so far as
he perceives that he has attained to the love and knowledge of God and his
neighbour. Now all these matters have been spoken of in the first book.
15. But as men are prone to estimate sins, not by reference to their inherent
sinfulness, but rather by reference to their own customs, it frequently
happens that a man will think nothing blameable except what the men of
his own country and time are accustomed to condemn, and nothing worthy
of praise or approval except what is sanctioned by the custom of his
companions; and thus it comes to pass, that if Scripture either enjoins what
is opposed to the customs of the hearers, or condemns what is not so
opposed, and if at the same time the authority of the word has a hold upon
their minds, they think that the expression is figurative. Now Scripture
enjoins nothing except charity, and condemns nothing except lust, and in
that way fashions the lives of men. In the same way, if an erroneous opinion
has taken possession of the mind, men think that whatever Scripture
asserts contrary to this must be figurative. Now Scripture asserts nothing
but the Catholic faith, in regard to things past, future, and present. It is a
narrative of the past, a prophecy of the future, and a description of the
present. But all these tend to nourish and strengthen charity, and to
overcome and root out lust.
16. I mean by charity that affection of the mind which aims at the
enjoyment of God for His own sake, and the enjoyment of one's self and
one's neighbour in subordination to God; by lust I mean that affection of the
mind which aims at enjoying one's self and one's neighbour, and other
corporeal things, without reference to God. Again, what lust, when
unsubdued, does towards corrupting one's own soul and body, is called vice;
but what it does to injure another is called crime. And these are the two
classes into which all sins may be divided. But the vices come first; for
when these have exhausted the soul, and reduced it to a kind of poverty, it
easily slides into crimes, in order to remove hindrances to, or to find
assistance in, its vices. In the same way, what charity does with a view to
one's own advantage is prudence; but what it does with a view to a
neighbour's advantage is called benevolence. And here prudence comes
first; because no one can confer an advantage on another which he does
not himself possess. Now in proportion as the dominion of lust is pulled
down, in the same proportion is that of charity built up.
Chap. 11. Rule for interpreting phrases which seem to ascribe severity to God
and the saints
17. Every severity, therefore, and apparent cruelty, either in word or deed,
that is ascribed in Holy Scripture to God or His saints, avails to the pulling
down of the dominion of lust. And if its meaning be clear, we are not to give
it some secondary reference, as if it were spoken figuratively. Take, for
example, that saying of the apostle: “But, after thy hardness and impenitent
heart, treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of wrath and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God; who will render to every man
according to his deeds: to them who, by patient continuance in well-doing,
seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal life; but unto them that
are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that
doeth evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile.” 87 But this is addressed
to those who, being unwilling to subdue their lust, are themselves involved
in the destruction of their lust. When, however, the dominion of lust is
overturned in a man over whom it had held sway, this plain expression is
used: “They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections
and lusts.” 88 Only that, even in these instances, some words are used
figuratively, as for example, “the wrath of God” and “crucified.” But these
are not so numerous, nor placed in such a way as to obscure the sense, and
make it allegorical or enigmatical, which is the kind of expression properly
called figurative. But in the saying addressed to Jeremiah, “See, I have this
day set thee over the nations, and over the kingdoms, to root out, and to
pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down,” 89 there is no doubt the
whole of the language is figurative, and to be referred to the end I have
spoken of.
Chap. 12. Rule for interpreting those sayings and actions which are ascribed
to God and the saints, and which yet seem to the unskilful to be wicked
18. Those things, again, whether only sayings or whether actual deeds,
which appear to the inexperienced to be sinful, and which are ascribed to
God, or to men whose holiness is put before us as an example, are wholly
figurative, and the hidden kernel of meaning they contain is to be picked
out as food for the nourishment of charity. Now, whoever uses transitory
objects less freely than is the custom of those among whom he lives, is
either temperate or superstitious; whoever, on the other hand, uses them
so as to transgress the bounds of the custom of the good men about him,
either has a further meaning in what he does, or is sinful. In all such
matters it is not the use of the objects, but the lust of the user, that is to
blame. Nobody in his sober senses would believe, for example, that when
our Lord's feet were anointed by the woman with precious ointment, 90 it
was for the same purpose for which luxurious and profligate men are
accustomed to have theirs anointed in those banquets which we abhor. For
the sweet odor means the good report which is earned by a life of good
works; and the man who wins this, while following in the footsteps of
Christ, anoints His feet (so to speak) with the most precious ointment. And
so that which in the case of other persons is often a sin, becomes, when
ascribed to God or a prophet, the sign of some great truth. Keeping
company with a harlot, for example, is one thing when it is the result of

87
   Rom. 2. 5-9.
88
   Gal. 5. 24.
89
   Jer. 1. 10.
90
   John, 12. 3.
abandoned manners, another thing when done in the course of his prophecy
by the prophet Hosea. 91 Because it is a shamefully wicked thing to strip the
body naked at a banquet among the drunken and licentious, it does not
follow that it is a sin to be naked in the baths.
19. We must, therefore, consider carefully what is suitable to times and
places and persons, and not rashly charge men with sins. For it is possible
that a wise man may use the daintiest food without any sin of epicurism or
gluttony, while a fool will crave for the vilest food with a most disgusting
eagerness of appetite. And any sane man would prefer eating fish after the
manner of our Lord, to eating lentils after the manner of Esau, or barley
after the manner of oxen. For there are several beasts that feed on
commoner kinds of food, but it does not follow that they are more
temperate than we are. For in all matters of this kind it is not the nature of
the things we use, but our reason for using them, and our manner of
seeking them, that make what we do either praiseworthy or blameable.
20. Now the saints of ancient times were, under the form of an earthly
kingdom, foreshadowing and foretelling the kingdom of heaven. And on
account of the necessity for a numerous offspring, the custom of one man
having several wives was at that time blameless: and for the same reason it
was not proper for one woman to have several husbands, because a woman
does not in that way become more fruitful, but, on the contrary, it is base
harlotry to seek either gain or offspring by promiscuous intercourse. In
regard to matters of this sort, whatever the holy men of those times did
without lust, Scripture passes over without blame, although they did things
which could not be done at the present time, except through lust. And
everything of this nature that is there narrated we are to take not only in its
historical and literal, but also in its figurative and prophetical sense, and to
interpret as bearing ultimately upon the end of love towards God or our
neighbor, or both. For as it was disgraceful among the ancient Romans to
wear tunics reaching to the heels, and furnished with sleeves, but now it is
disgraceful for men honorably born not to wear tunics of that description:
so we must take heed in regard to other things also, that lust do not mix
with our use of them; for lust not only abuses to wicked ends the customs
of those among whom we live, but frequently also transgressing the bounds
of custom, betrays, in a disgraceful outbreak, its own hideousness, which
was concealed under the cover of prevailing fashions.
Chap. 13. Same subject, continued
21. Whatever, then, is in accordance with the habits of those with whom we
are either compelled by necessity, or undertake as a matter of duty, to
spend this life, is to be turned by good and great men to some prudent or



91
     Hos. 1. 2.
benevolent end, either directly, as is our duty, or figuratively, as is allowable
to prophets.
Chap. 14. Error of those who think that there is no absolute right and wrong
22. But when men unacquainted with other modes of life than their own
meet with the record of such actions, unless they are restrained by
authority, they look upon them as sins, and do not consider that their own
customs either in regard to marriage, or feasts, or dress, or the other
necessities and adornments of human life, appear sinful to the people of
other nations and other times. And, distracted by this endless variety of
customs, some who were half asleep (as I may say)—that is, who were
neither sunk in the deep sleep of folly, nor were able to awake into the light
of wisdom—have thought that there was no such thing as absolute right,
but that every nation took its own custom for right; and that, since every
nation has a different custom, and right must remain unchangeable, it
becomes manifest that there is no such thing as right at all. Such men did
not perceive, to take only one example, that the precept, “Whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them,” 92 cannot be
altered by any diversity of national customs. And this precept, when it is
referred to the love of God, destroys all vices when to the love of one's
neighbor, puts an end to all crimes. For no one is willing to defile his own
dwelling; he ought not, therefore, to defile the dwelling of God, that is,
himself. And no one wishes an injury to be done him by another; he himself,
therefore, ought not to do injury to another.
Chap. 15. Rule for interpreting figurative expressions
23. The tyranny of lust being thus overthrown, charity reigns through its
supremely just laws of love to God for His own sake, and love to one's self
and one's neighbor for God's sake. Accordingly, in regard to figurative
expressions, a rule such as the following will be observed, to carefully turn
over in our minds and meditate upon what we read till an interpretation be
found that tends to establish the reign of love. Now, if when taken literally
it at once gives a meaning of this kind, the expression is not to be
considered figurative.
Chap. 16. Rule for interpreting commands and prohibitions
24. If the sentence is one of command, either forbidding a crime or vice, or
enjoining an act of prudence or benevolence, it is not figurative. If, however,
it seems to enjoin a crime or vice, or to forbid an act of prudence or
benevolence, it is figurative. “Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,”
says Christ, “and drink His blood, ye have no life in you.” 93 This seems to
enjoin a crime or a vice; it is therefore a figure, enjoining that we should
have a share in the sufferings of our Lord, and that we should retain a
sweet and profitable memory of the fact that His flesh was wounded and
92
     Matt. 7. 12. Cf. Tobit, 4. 15.
93
     John, 6. 53.
crucified for us. Scripture says: “If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he
thirst, give him drink”; and this is beyond doubt a command to do a
kindness. But in what follows, “for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire
on his head,” 94 one would think a deed of malevolence was enjoined. Do
not doubt, then, that the expression is figurative; and, while it is possible to
interpret it in two ways, one pointing to the doing of an injury, the other to a
display of superiority, let charity on the contrary call you back to
benevolence, and interpret the coals of fire as the burning groans of
penitence by which a man's pride is cured who bewails that he has been
the enemy of one who came to his assistance in distress. In the same way,
when our Lord says, “He who loveth his life shall lose it,” 95 we are not to
think that He forbids the prudence with which it is a man's duty to care for
his life, but that He says in a figurative sense, “Let him lose his life”—that is,
let him destroy and lose that perverted and unnatural use which he now
makes of his life, and through which his desires are fixed on temporal
things so that he gives no heed to eternal. It is written: “Give to the godly
man, and help not a sinner.” 96 The latter clause of this sentence seems to
forbid benevolence; for it says, “help not a sinner.” Understand, therefore,
that “sinner” is put figuratively for sin, so that it is his sin you are not to
help.
Chap. 17. Some commands are given to all in common, others to particular
classes
25. Again, it often happens that a man who has attained, or thinks he has
attained, to a higher grade of spiritual life, thinks that the commands given
to those who are still in the lower grades are figurative; for example, if he
has embraced a life of celibacy and made himself a eunuch for the kingdom
of heaven's sake, he contends that the commands given in Scripture about
loving and ruling a wife are not to be taken literally, but figuratively; and if
he has determined to keep his virgin unmarried, he tries to put a figurative
interpretation on the passage where it is said, “Marry thy daughter, and so
shall thou have performed a weighty matter.” 97 Accordingly, another of our
rules for understanding the Scriptures will be as follows—to recognize that
some commands are given to all in common, others to particular classes of
persons, that the medicine may act not only upon the state of health as a
whole, but also upon the special weakness of each member. For that which
cannot be raised to a higher state must be cared for in its own state.
Chap. 18. We must take into consideration the time at which anything was
enjoyed or allowed


94
   Rom. 12. 20; Prov. 25. 21, 22.
95
   John, 12. 25. Cf. Matt. 10. 39.
96
   Ecclus. 12. 4. Cf. Tobit, 4. 17.
97
   Ecclus. 7. 27.
26. We must also be on our guard against supposing that what in the Old
Testament, making allowance for the condition of those times, is not a
crime or a vice even if we take it literally and not figuratively, can be
transferred to the present time as a habit of life. For no one will do this
except lust has dominion over him, and endeavors to find support for itself
in the very Scriptures which were intended to overthrow it. And the
wretched man does not perceive that such matters are recorded with this
useful design, that men of good hope may learn the salutary lesson, both
that the custom they spurn can be turned to a good use, and that which
they embrace can be used to condemnation, if the use of the former be
accompanied with charity, and the use of the latter with lust.
27. For, if it was possible for one man to use many wives with chastity, it is
possible for another to use one wife with lust. And I look with greater
approval on the man who uses the fruitfulness of many wives for the sake
of an ulterior object, than on the man who enjoys the body of one wife for
its own sake. For in the former case the man aims at a useful object suited
to the circumstances of the times; in the latter case he gratifies a lust
which is engrossed in temporal enjoyments. And those men to whom the
apostle permitted as a matter of indulgence to have one wife because of
their incontinence,98 were less near to God than those who, though they
had each of them numerous wives, yet just as a wise man uses food and
drink only for the sake of bodily health, used marriage only for the sake of
offspring. And, accordingly, if these last had been still alive at the advent of
our Lord, when the time not of casting stones away but of gathering them
together had come,99 they would have immediately made themselves
eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake. For there is no difficulty in
abstaining unless when there is lust in enjoying. And assuredly those men
of whom I speak knew that wantonness even in regard to wives is abuse
and intemperance, as is proved by Tobit's prayer when he was married to
his wife. For he says: “Blessed art Thou, O God of our fathers, and blessed is
Thy holy and glorious name for ever; let the heavens bless Thee, and all Thy
creatures. Thou madest Adam, and gavest him Eve his wife for an helper
and stay.... And now, O Lord, Thou knowest that I take not this my sister for
lust, but uprightly: therefore have pity on us, O Lord.” 100
Chap. 19. Wicked men judge others by themselves
28. But those who, giving the rein to lust, either wander about steeping
themselves in a multitude of debaucheries, or even in regard to one wife
not only exceed the measure necessary for the procreation of children, but
with the shameless licence of a sort of slavish freedom heap up the filth of
a still more beastly excess, such men do not believe it possible that the

98
    I Cor. 7. 1, 2, 9.
99
    Eccles. 3. 5.
100
     Tobit, 8. 5-7.
men of ancient times used a number of wives with temperance, looking to
nothing but the duty, necessary in the circumstances of the time, of
propagating the race; and what they themselves, who are entangled in the
meshes of lust, do not accomplish in the case of a single wife, they think
utterly impossible in the case of a number of wives.
29. But these same men might say that it is not right even to honor and
praise good and holy men, because they themselves when they are honored
and praised, swell with pride, becoming the more eager for the emptiest
sort of distinction the more frequently and the more widely they are blown
about on the tongue of flattery, and so become so light that a breath of
rumor, whether it appear prosperous or adverse, will carry them into the
whirlpool of vice or dash them on the rocks of crime. Let them, then, learn
how trying and difficult it is for themselves to escape either being caught by
the bait of praise, or pierced by the stings of insult; but let them not
measure others by their own standard.
Chap. 20. Consistency of good men in all outward circumstances
Let them believe, on the contrary, that the apostles of our faith were
neither puffed up when they were honored by men, nor cast down when
they were despised. And certainly neither sort of temptation was wanting to
those great men. For they were both cried up by the loud praises of
believers, and cried down by the slanderous reports of their persecutors.
But the apostles used all these things, as occasion served, and were not
corrupted; and in the same way the saints of old used their wives with
reference to the necessities of their own times, and were not in bondage to
lust as they are who refuse to believe these things.
30. For if they had been under the influence of any such passion, they could
never have restrained themselves from implacable hatred towards their
sons, by whom they knew that their wives and concubines were solicited
and debauched.
Chap. 21. David not lustful, though he fell into adultery
But when King David had suffered this injury at the hands of his impious
and unnatural son, he not only bore with him in his mad passion, but
mourned over him in his death. He certainly was not caught in the meshes
of carnal jealousy, seeing that it was not his own injuries but the sins of his
son that moved him. For it was on this account he had given orders that his
son should not be slain if he were conquered in battle, that he might have a
place of repentance after he was subdued; and when he was baffled in this
design, he mourned over his son's death, not because of his own loss, but
because he knew to what punishment so impious an adulterer and parricide
had been hurried.101 For prior to this, in the case of another son who had



101
      Cf. II Sam. 16. 22; 18. 5; 19. 1.
been guilty of no crime, though he was dreadfully afflicted for him while he
was sick, yet he comforted himself after his death. 102
31. And with what moderation and self-restraint those men used their wives
appears chiefly in this, that when this same king, carried away by the heat
of passion and by temporal prosperity, had taken unlawful possession of
one woman, whose husband also he ordered to be put to death, he was
accused of his crime by a prophet, who, when he had come to show him his
sin, set before him the parable of the poor man who had but one ewe-lamb,
and whose neighbor, though he had many, yet when a guest came to him
spared to take of his own flock, but set his poor neighbor's one lamb before
his guest to eat. And David's anger being kindled against the man, he
commanded that he should be put to death, and the lamb restored fourfold
to the poor man; thus unwittingly condemning the sin he had wittingly
committed.103 And when he had been shown this, and God's punishment had
been denounced against him, he wiped out his sin in deep penitence. But
yet in this parable it was the adultery only that was indicated by the poor
man's ewe-lamb; about the killing of the woman's husband—that is, about
the murder of the poor man himself who had the one ewe-lamb—nothing is
said in the parable, so that the sentence of condemnation is pronounced
against the adultery alone. And hence we may understand with what
temperance he possessed a number of wives when he was forced to punish
himself for transgressing in regard to one woman. But in his case the
immoderate desire did not take up its abode with him, but was only a
passing guest. On this account the unlawful appetite is called even by the
accusing prophet, a guest. For he did not say that he took the poor man's
ewe-lamb to make a feast for his king, but for his guest. In the case of his
son Solomon, however, this lust did not come and pass away like a guest,
but reigned as a king. And about him Scripture is not silent, but accuses
him of being a lover of strange women; for in the beginning of his reign he
was inflamed with a desire for wisdom, but after he had attained it through
spiritual love, he lost it through carnal lust. 104
Chap. 22. Rule regarding passages of Scripture in which approval is
expressed of actions which are new condemned by good men
32. Therefore, although all, or nearly all, the transactions recorded in the
Old Testament are to be taken not literally only, but figuratively as well,
nevertheless even in the case of those which the reader has taken literally,
and which, though the authors of them are praised, are repugnant to the
habits of the good men who since our Lord's advent are the custodians of
the divine commands, let him refer the figure to its interpretation, but let


102
    II Sam. 12. 19-23.
103
    II Sam. 12. 1-6.
104
    II Chron. 1. 10-12; I Kings 11. 1-3.
him not transfer the act to his habits of life. For many things which were
done as duties at that time, cannot now be done except through lust.
Chap. 23. Rule regarding the narrative of sins of great men
33. And when he reads of the sins of great men, although he may be able to
see and to trace out in them a figure of things to come, let him yet put the
literal fact to this use also, to teach him not to dare to vaunt himself in his
own good deeds, and in comparison with his own righteousness, to despise
others as sinners, when he sees in the case of men so eminent both the
storms that are to be avoided and the shipwrecks that are to be wept over.
For the sins of these men were recorded to this end, that men might
everywhere and always tremble at that saying of the apostle: “Wherefore let
him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.” 105 For there is hardly
a page of Scripture on which it is not clearly written that God resisteth the
proud and giveth grace to the humble. 106
Chap. 24. The character of the expressions used is above all to have weight
34. The chief thing to be inquired into, therefore, in regard to any expression
that we are trying to understand is, whether it is literal or figurative. For
when it is ascertained to be figurative, it is easy, by an application of the
laws of things which we discussed in the first book, to turn it in every way
until we arrive at a true interpretation, especially when we bring to our aid
experience strengthened by the exercise of piety. Now we find out whether
an expression is literal or figurative by attending to the considerations
indicated above.
Chap. 25. The same word does not always signify the same thing
And when it is shown to be figurative, the words in which it is expressed
will be found to be drawn either from like objects or from objects having
some affinity.
35. But as there are many ways in which things show a likeness to each
other, we are not to suppose there is any rule that what a thing signifies by
similitude in one place it is to be taken to signify in all other places. For our
Lord used leaven both in a bad sense, as when He said, “Beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees,” 107 and in a good sense, as when He said, “The
kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.” 108
36. Now the rule in regard to this variation has two forms. For things that
signify now one thing and now another, signify either things that are
contrary, or things that are only different. They signify contraries, for
example, when they are used metaphorically at one time in a good sense, at
another in a bad, as in the case of the leaven mentioned above. Another

105
    I Cor. 10. 12.
106
    Cf. Jas. 4. 6 and I Pet. 5. 6.
107
    Matt. 16. 6; Luke 12. 1.
108
    Luke, 13. 21.
example of the same is that a lion stands for Christ in the place where it is
said, “The lion of the tribe of Judah hath prevailed”; 109 and again, stands for
the devil where it is written, “Your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion,
walketh about seeking whom he may devour.” 110 In the same way the
serpent is used in a good sense, “Be wise as serpents”; 111 and again, in a bad
sense, “The serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety.” 112 Bread is used in a
good sense, “I am the living bread which came down from heaven”; 113 in a
bad, “Bread eaten in secret is pleasant.” 114 And so in a great many other
cases. The examples I have adduced are indeed by no means doubtful in
their signification, because only plain instances ought to be used as
examples. There are passages, however, in regard to which it is uncertain in
what sense they ought to be taken, as for example, “In the hand of the Lord
there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full of mixture.” 115 Now it is
uncertain whether this denotes the wrath of God, but not to the last
extremity of punishment, that is, “to the very dregs”; or whether it denotes
the grace of the Scriptures passing away from the Jews and coming to the
Gentiles, because “He has put down one and set up another”—certain
observances, however, which they understand in a carnal manner, still
remaining among the Jews, for “the dregs hereof is not yet wrung out.” The
following is an example of the same object being taken, not in opposite, but
only in different significations: water denotes people, as we read in the
Apocalypse,116 and also the Holy Spirit, as for example, “Out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water”; 117 and many other things besides water must be
interpreted according to the place in which they are found.
37. And in the same way other objects are not single in their signification,
but each one of them denotes not two only but sometimes even several
different things, according to the connection in which it is found.
Chap. 26. Obscure passages are to be interpreted by those which are clearer
Now from the places where the sense in which they are used is more
manifest we must gather the sense in which they are to be understood in
obscure passages. For example, there is no better way of understanding the
words addressed to God, “Take hold of shield and buckler and stand up for
mine help,” 118 than by referring to the passage where we read, “Thou, Lord,
hast crowned us with Thy favor as with a shield.” 119 And yet we are not so

109
     Rev. 5. 5.
110
    I Pet. 5. 8.
111
    Matt. 10. 16.
112
    II Cor. 11. 3.
113
    John, 6. 51.
114
    Prov. 9. 17.
115
    Ps. 75. 8.
116
    Rev. 17. 15.
117
    John, 7. 38.
118
    Ps. 35. 2.
119
    Ps. 5. 12.
to understand it, as that wherever we meet with a shield put to indicate a
protection of any kind, we must take it as signifying nothing but the favor of
God. For we hear also of the shield of faith, “wherewith,” says the apostle,
“ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked.” 120 Nor ought
we, on the other hand, in regard to spiritual armor of this kind to assign
faith to the shield only; for we read in another place of the breastplate of
faith: “putting on,” says the apostle, “the breastplate of faith and love.” 121
Chap. 27. One passage susceptible of various interpretations
38. When, again, not some one interpretation, but two or more
interpretations are put upon the same words of Scripture, even though the
meaning the writer intended remain undiscovered, there is no danger if it
can be shown from other passages of Scripture that any of the
interpretations put on the words is in harmony with the truth. And if a man
in searching the Scriptures endeavors to get at the intention of the author
through whom the Holy Spirit spoke, whether he succeeds in this endeavor,
or whether he draws a different meaning from the words, but one that is
not opposed to sound doctrine, he is free from blame so long as he is
supported by the testimony of some other passage of Scripture. For the
author perhaps saw that this very meaning lay in the words which we are
trying to interpret; and assuredly the Holy Spirit, who through him spoke
these words, foresaw that this interpretation would occur to the reader, nay,
made provision that it should occur to him, seeing that it too is founded on
truth. For what more liberal and more fruitful provision could God have
made in regard to the Sacred Scriptures than that the same words might be
understood in several senses, all of which are sanctioned by the concurring
testimony of other passages equally divine?
Chap. 28. It is safer to explain a doubtful passage by other passages of
Scripture than by reason
39. When, however, a meaning is evolved of such a kind that what is
doubtful in it cannot be cleared up by indubitable evidence from Scripture,
it remains for us to make it clear by the evidence of reason. But this is a
dangerous practice. For it is far safer to walk by the light of Holy Scripture;
so that when we wish to examine the passages that are obscured by
metaphorical expressions, we may either obtain a meaning about which
there is no controversy, or if a controversy arises, may settle it by the
application of testimonies sought out in every portion of the same
Scripture.
Chap. 29. The knowledge of tropes is necessary
40. Moreover, I would have learned men to know that the authors of our
Scriptures use all those forms of expression which grammarians call by the
Greek name tropes, and use them more freely and in greater variety than
120
      Eph. 6. 16.
121
      I Thess. 5. 8.
people who are unacquainted with the Scriptures, and have learnt these
figures of speech from other writings, can imagine or believe. Nevertheless
those who know these tropes recognize them in Scripture, and are very
much assisted by their knowledge of them in understanding Scripture. But
this is not the place to teach them to the illiterate, lest it might seem that I
was teaching grammar. I certainly advise, however, that they be learnt
elsewhere, although indeed I have already given that advice above, in the
second book—namely, where I treated of the necessary knowledge of
languages. For the written characters from which grammar itself gets its
name (the Greek name for letters being γράμματα) are the signs of sounds
made by the articulate voice with which we speak. Now of some of these
figures of speech we find in Scripture not only examples (which we have of
them all), but the very names as well: for instance, allegory, enigma, and
parable. However, nearly all these tropes which are said to be learnt as a
matter of liberal education are found even in the ordinary speech of men
who have learnt no grammar, but are content to use the vulgar idiom. For
who does not say, “So may you flourish?” And this is the figure of speech
called metaphor. Who does not speak of a fish-pond in which there is no
fish, which was not made for fish, and yet gets its name from fish? And this
is the figure called catachresis.
41. It would be tedious to go over all the rest in this way; for the speech of
the vulgar makes use of them all, even of those more curious figures which
mean the very opposite of what they say, as for example, those called irony
and antiphrasis. Now in irony we indicate by the tone of voice the meaning
we desire to convey; as when we say to a man who is behaving badly, “You
are doing well.” But it is not by the tone of voice that we make an
antiphrasis to indicate the opposite of what the words convey; but either
the words in which it is expressed are used in the opposite of their
etymological sense, as a grove is called lucus from its want of light; or it is
customary to use a certain form of expression, although it puts yes for no
by a law of contraries, as when we ask in a place for what is not there, and
get the answer, “There is plenty”; or we add words that make it plain we
mean the opposite of what we say, as in the expression, “Beware of him, for
he is a good man.” And what illiterate man is there that does not use such
expressions, although he knows nothing at all about either the nature or the
names of these figures of speech? And yet the knowledge of these is
necessary for clearing up the difficulties of Scripture; because when the
words taken literally give an absurd meaning, we ought forthwith to inquire
whether they may not be used in this or that figurative sense which we are
unacquainted with; and in this way many obscure passages have had light
thrown upon them.
Chap. 30. The rules of Tichonius the Donatist examined
42. One Tichonius, who, although a Donatist himself, has written most
triumphantly against the Donatists (and herein showed himself of a most
inconsistent disposition, that he was unwilling to give them up altogether),
wrote a book which he called the Book of Rules, because in it he laid down
seven rules, which are, as it were, keys to open the secrets of Scripture.
And of these rules, the first relates to the Lord and His body, the second to
the twofold division of the Lord's body, the third to the promises and the
law, the fourth to species and genus, the fifth to times, the sixth to
recapitulation, the seventh to the devil and his body. Now these rules, as
expounded by their author, do indeed, when carefully considered, afford
considerable assistance in penetrating the secrets of the sacred writings;
but still they do not explain all the difficult passages, for there are several
other methods required, which are so far from being embraced in this
number of seven, that the author himself explains many obscure passages
without using any of his rules; finding, indeed, that there was no need for
them, as there was no difficulty in the passage of the kind to which his
rules apply. As, for example, he inquires what we are to understand in the
Apocalypse by the seven angels of the churches to whom John is
commanded to write; and after much and various reasoning, arrives at the
conclusion that the angels are the churches themselves. And throughout
this long and full discussion, although the matter inquired into is certainly
very obscure, no use whatever is made of the rules. This is enough for an
example, for it would be too tedious and troublesome to collect all the
passages in the canonical Scriptures which present obscurities of such a
kind as require none of these seven rules for their elucidation.
43. The author himself, however, when commending these rules, attributes
so much value to them that it would appear as if, when they were
thoroughly known and duly applied, we should be able to interpret all the
obscure passages in the law—that is, in the sacred books. For he thus
commences this very book: “Of all the things that occur to me, I consider
none so necessary as to write a little book of rules, and, as it were, to make
keys for, and put windows in, the secret places of the law. For there are
certain mystical rules which hold the key to the secret recesses of the
whole law, and render visible the treasures of truth that are to many
invisible. And if this system of rules be received as I communicate it,
without jealousy, what is shut shall be laid open, and what is obscure shall
be elucidated, so that a man travelling through the vast forest of prophecy
shall, if he follow these rules as pathways of light, be preserved from going
astray.” Now, if he had said, “There are certain mystical rules which hold the
key to some of the secrets of the law,” or even “which hold the key to the
great secrets of the law,” and not what he does say, “the secret recesses of
the whole law”; and if he had not said “What is shut shall be laid open,”
but, “Many things that are shut shall be laid open,” he would have said what
was true, and he would not, by attributing more than is warranted by the
facts to his very elaborate and useful work, have led the reader into false
expectations. And I have thought it right to say thus much, in order both
that the book may be read by the studious (for it is of very great assistance
in understanding Scripture), and that no more may be expected from it than
it really contains. Certainly it must be read with caution, not only on
account of the errors into which the author falls as a man, but chiefly on
account of the heresies which he advances as a Donatist. And now I shall
briefly indicate what these seven rules teach or advise.
Chap. 31. The first rule of Tichonius
44. The first is about the Lord and His body, and it is this, that, knowing as
we do that the head and the body—that is, Christ and His Church—are
sometimes indicated to us under one person (for it is not in vain that it is
said to believers, “Ye then are Abraham's seed,” 122 when there is but one
seed of Abraham, and that is Christ), we need not be in a difficulty when a
transition is made from the head to the body or from the body to the head,
and yet no change made in the person spoken of. For a single person is
represented as saying, “He hath decked me as a bridegroom with
ornaments, and adorned me as a bride with jewels”; 123 and yet it is, of
course, a matter for interpretation which of these two refers to the head
and which to the body, that is, which to Christ and which to the Church.
Chap. 32. The second rule of Tichonius
45. The second rule is about the twofold division of the body of the Lord; but
this indeed is not a suitable name, for that is really no part of the body of
Christ which will not be with Him in eternity. We ought, therefore, to say
that the rule is about the true and the mixed body of the Lord, or the true
and the counterfeit, or some such name; because, not to speak of eternity,
hypocrites cannot even now be said to be in Him, although they seem to be
in His Church. And hence this rule might be designated thus: Concerning the
mixed Church. Now this rule requires the reader to be on his guard when
Scripture, although it has now come to address or speak of a different set
of persons, seems to be addressing or speaking of the same persons as
before, just as if both sets constituted one body in consequence of their
being for the time united in a common participation of the sacraments. An
example of this is that passage in the Song of Solomon, “I am black, but
comely, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.” 124 For it is not
said, I was black as the tents of Kedar, but am now comely as the curtains
of Solomon. The Church declares itself to be at present both; and this
because the good fish and the bad are for the time mixed up in the one


122
    Gal. 3. 29.
123
    Isa. 61. 10 (Septuagint).
124
    Song of Sol. 1. 5.
net.125 For the tents of Kedar pertain to Ishmael, who “shall not be heir with
the son of the free woman.” 126 And in the same way, when God says of the
good part of the Church, “I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not;
I will lead them in paths that they have not known; I will make darkness
light before them, and crooked things straight: these things will I do unto
them, and not forsake them”; 127 He immediately adds in regard to the other
part, the bad that is mixed with the good, “They shall be turned back.” Now
these words refer to a set of persons altogether different from the former;
but as the two sets are for the present united in one body, He speaks as if
there were no change in the subject of the sentence. They will not, however,
always be in one body; for one of them is that wicked servant of whom we
are told in the gospel, whose lord, when he comes, “shall cut him asunder
and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites.” 128
Chap. 33. The third rule of Tichonius
46. The third rule relates to the promises and the law, and may be
designated in other terms as relating to the spirit and the letter, which is
the name I made use of when writing a book on this subject. It may be also
named, of grace and the law. This, however, seems to me to be a great
question in itself, rather than a rule to be applied to the solution of other
questions. It was the want of clear views on this question that originated, or
at least greatly aggravated, the Pelagian heresy. And the efforts of Tichonius
to clear up this point were good, but not complete. For, in discussing the
question about faith and works, he said that works were given us by God as
the reward of faith, but that faith itself was so far our own that it did not
come to us from God; not keeping in mind the saying of the apostle: “Peace
be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord
Jesus Christ.” 129 But he had not come into contact with this heresy, which
has arisen in our time, and has given us much labor and trouble in
defending against it the grace of God which is through our Lord Jesus
Christ, and which (according to the saying of the apostle, “There must be
also heresies among you, that they which are approved may be made
manifest among you” 130) has made us much more watchful and diligent to
discover in Scripture what escaped Tichonius, who, having no enemy to
guard against, was less attentive and anxious on this point, namely, that
even faith itself is the gift of Him Who “hath dealt to every man the
measure of faith.” 131 Whence it is said to certain believers: “Unto you it is
given, in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on Him, but also to suffer

125
    Matt. 13. 47, 48.
126
    Gal. 4. 30.
127
    Isa. 42. 16.
128
    Matt. 24. 50, 51.
129
    Eph. 6. 23.
130
    I Cor. 11. 19.
131
    Rom. 12. 3.
for His sake.” 132 Who, then, can doubt that each of these is the gift of God,
when he learns from this passage, and believes, that each of them is given?
There are many other testimonies besides which prove this. But I am not
now treating of this doctrine. I have, however, dealt with it, one place or
another, very frequently.
Chap. 34. The fourth rule of Tichonius
47. The fourth rule of Tichonius is about species and genus. For so he calls
it, intending that by species should be understood a part, by genus the
whole of which that which he calls species is a part: as, for example, every
single city is a part of the great society of nations: the city he calls a
species, all nations constitute the genus. There is no necessity for here
applying that subtilty of distinction which is in use among logicians, who
discuss with great acuteness the difference between a part and a species.
The rule is of course the same, if anything of the kind referred to is found in
Scripture, not in regard to a single city, but in regard to a single province, or
tribe, or kingdom. Not only, for example, about Jerusalem, or some of the
cities of the Gentiles, such as Tyre or Babylon, are things said in Scripture
whose significance oversteps the limits of the city, and which are more
suitable when applied to all nations; but in regard to Judea also, and Egypt,
and Assyria, or any other nation you choose to take which contains
numerous cities, but still is not the whole world, but only a part of it, things
are said which pass over the limits of that particular country, and apply
more fitly to the whole of which this is a part; or, as our author terms it, to
the genus of which this is a species. And hence these words have come to
be commonly known, so that even uneducated people understand what is
laid down specially, and what generally, in any given Imperial command. The
same thing occurs in the case of men: things are said of Solomon, for
example, the scope of which reaches far beyond him, and which are only
properly understood when applied to Christ and His Church, of which
Solomon is a part.133
48. Now the species is not always overstepped, for things are often said of
such a kind as evidently apply to it also, or perhaps even to it exclusively.
But when Scripture, having up to a certain point been speaking about the
species, makes a transition at that point from the species to the genus, the
reader must then be carefully on his guard against seeking in the species
what he can find much better and more surely in the genus. Take, for
example, what the prophet Ezekiel says: “When the house of Israel dwelt in
their own land, they defiled it by their own way, and by their doings: their
way was before me as the uncleanness of a removed woman. Wherefore I
poured my fury upon them for the blood that they had shed upon the land,
and for their idols wherewith they had polluted it: and I scattered them
132
      Phil. 1. 29.
133
      II Sam. 7. 14-16.
among the heathen, and they were dispersed through the countries:
according to their way, and according to their doings, I judged them.” 134 Now
it is easy to understand that this applies to that house of Israel of which
the apostle says, “Behold Israel after the flesh”; 135 because the people of
Israel after the flesh did both perform and endure all that is here referred
to. What immediately follows, too, may be understood as applying to the
same people. But when the prophet begins to say, “And I will sanctify my
great name, which was profaned among the heathen, which ye have
profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen shall know that I am the
Lord,” 136 the reader ought now carefully to observe the way in which the
species is overstepped and the genus taken in. For he goes on to say: “And I
shall be sanctified in you before their eyes. For I will take you from among
the heathen, and gather you out of all countries, and will bring you into your
own land. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean:
from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh and I will give you a heart of
flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my commandments, and do them. And ye shall
dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and ye shall be my people, and
I will be your God. I will also save you from all your uncleannesses.” 137 Now
that this is a prophecy of the New Testament, to which pertain not only the
remnant of that one nation of which it is elsewhere said, “For though the
number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a remnant of
them shall be saved,” 138 but also the other nations which were promised to
their fathers and our fathers; and that there is here a promise of that
washing of regeneration which, as we see, is now imparted to all nations, no
one who looks into the matter can doubt. And that saying of the apostle,
when he is commending the grace of the New Testament and its excellence
in comparison with the Old, “Ye are our epistle... written not with ink, but
with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables
of the heart,” 139 has an evident reference to this place where the prophet
says, “A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you;
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
heart of flesh.” 140 Now the heart of flesh from which the apostle's
expression, “the fleshy tables of the heart,” is drawn, the prophet intended
to point out as distinguished from the stony heart by the possession of

134
    Ezek. 36. 17-19.
135
    I Cor. 10. 18.
136
    Ezek. 36. 23.
137
    Ezek. 36. 23-29.
138
    Isa. 10. 22.
139
    II Cor. 3. 2, 3.
140
    Ezek. 38, 26.
sentient life; and by sentient he understood intelligent life. And thus the
spiritual Israel is made up, not of one nation, but of all the nations which
were promised to the fathers in their seed, that is, in Christ.
49. This spiritual Israel, therefore, is distinguished from the carnal Israel
which is of one nation, by newness of grace, not by nobility of descent, in
feeling, not in race; but the prophet, in his depth of meaning, while speaking
of the carnal Israel, passes on, without indicating the transition, to speak of
the spiritual, and although now speaking of the latter, seems to be still
speaking of the former; not that he grudges us the clear apprehension of
Scripture, as if we were enemies, but that he deals with us as a physician,
giving us a wholesome exercise for our spirit. And therefore we ought to
take this saying, “And I will bring you into your own land,” and what he says
shortly afterwards, as if repeating himself, “And ye shall dwell in the land
that I gave to your fathers,” not literally, as if they referred to Israel after the
flesh, but spiritually, as referring to the spiritual Israel. For the Church,
without spot or wrinkle, gathered out of all nations, and destined to reign
for ever with Christ, is itself the land of the blessed, the land of the living;
and we are to understand that this was given to the fathers when it was
promised to them for what the fathers believed would be given in its own
time was to them, on account of the unchangeableness of the promise and
purpose, the same as if it were already given; just as the apostle, writing to
Timothy, speaks of the grace which is given to the saints: “Not according to
our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given us
in Christ Jesus before the world began; but is now made manifest by the
appearing of our Saviour.” 141 He speaks of the grace as given at a time when
those to whom it was to be given were not yet in existence; because he
looks upon that as having been already done in the arrangement and
purpose of God, which was to take place in its own time, and he himself
speaks of it as now made manifest. It is possible, however, that these
words may refer to the land of the age to come, when there will be a new
heaven and a new earth, wherein the unrighteous shall be unable to dwell.
And so it is truly said to the righteous, that the land itself is theirs, no part
of which will belong to the unrighteous; because it is the same as if it were
itself given, when it is firmly settled that it shall be given.
Chap. 35. The fifth rule of Tichonius
50. The fifth rule Tichonius lays down is one he designates of times—a rule
by which we can frequently discover or conjecture quantities of time which
are not expressly mentioned in Scripture. And he says that this rule applies
in two ways: either to the figure of speech called synecdoche, or to
legitimate numbers. The figure synecdoche either puts the part for the
whole, or the whole for the part. As, for example, in reference to the time

141
      II Tim. 1. 9, 10.
when, in the presence of only three of His disciples, our Lord was
transfigured on the mount, so that His face shone as the sun, and His
raiment was white as snow, one evangelist says that this event occurred
“after eight days,” 142 while another says that it occurred “after six days.” 143
Now both of these statements about the number of days cannot be true,
unless we suppose that the writer who says “after eight days,” counted the
latter part of the day on which Christ uttered the prediction and the first
part of the day on which he showed its fulfillment as two whole days; while
the writer who says “after six days,” counted only the whole unbroken days
between these two. This figure of speech, which puts the part for the
whole, explains also the great question about the resurrection of Christ. For
unless to the latter part of the day on which He suffered we join the
previous night, and count it as a whole day, and to the latter part of the
night in which He arose we join the Lord's day which was just dawning, and
count it also a whole day, we cannot make out the three days and three
nights during which He foretold that He would be in the heart of the
earth.144
51. In the next place, our author calls those numbers legitimate which Holy
Scripture more highly favors such as seven, or ten, or twelve, or any of the
other numbers which the diligent reader of Scripture soon comes to know.
Now numbers of this sort are often put for time universal; as for example,
“Seven times in the day do I praise Thee,” means just the same as “His
praise shall continually be in my mouth.” 145 And their force is exactly the
same, either when multiplied by ten, as seventy and seven hundred
(whence the seventy years mentioned in Jeremiah may be taken in a
spiritual sense for the whole time during which the Church is a sojourner
among aliens);146 or when multiplied into themselves, as ten into ten gives
one hundred, and twelve into twelve gives one hundred and forty-four,
which last number is used in the Apocalypse to signify the whole body of
the saints.147 Hence it appears that it is not merely questions about times
that are to be settled by these numbers, but that their significance is of
much wider application, and extends to many subjects. That number in the
Apocalypse, for example, mentioned above, has not reference to times, but
to men.
Chap. 36. The sixth rule of Tichonius
52. The sixth rule Tichonius calls the recapitulation, which, with sufficient
watchfulness, is discovered in difficult parts of Scripture. For certain
occurrences are so related, that the narrative appears to be following the
142
    Luke, 9. 28.
143
    Matt. 17. 1; Mark, 9, 2.
144
    Matt. 12. 40.
145
    Cf. Ps. 119. 164. with 34. 2.
146
    Jer. 25. 11.
147
    Rev. 7. 4.
order of time, or the continuity of events, when it really goes back without
mentioning it to previous occurrences, which had been passed over in their
proper place. And we make mistakes if we do not understand this, from
applying the rule here spoken of. For example, in the book of Genesis we
read, “And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there He
put the man whom He had formed. And out of the ground made the Lord
God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food.” 148
Now here it seems to be indicated that the events last mentioned took
place after God had formed man and put him in the garden; whereas the
fact is, that the two events having been briefly mentioned, viz., that God
planted a garden, and there put the man whom He had formed, the
narrative goes back, by way of recapitulation, to tell what had before been
omitted, the way in which the garden was planted: that out of the ground
God made to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for
food. Here there follows, “The tree of life also was in the midst of the
garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.” Next the river is
mentioned which watered the garden, and which was parted into four
heads, the sources of four streams; and all this has reference to the
arrangements of the garden. And when this is finished, there is a repetition
of the fact which had been already told, but which in the strict order of
events came after all this: “And the Lord God took the man, and put him
into the garden of Eden.” 149 For it was after all these other things were done
that man was put in the garden, as now appears from the order of the
narrative itself: it was not after man was put there that the other things
were done, as the previous statement might be thought to imply, did we not
accurately mark and understand the recapitulation by which the narrative
reverts to what had previously been passed over.
53. In the same book, again, when the generations of the sons of Noah are
recounted, it is said: “These are the sons of Ham, after their families, after
their tongues, in their countries, and in their nations.” 150 And, again, when
the sons of Shem are enumerated: “These are the sons of Shem, after their
families, after their tongues, in their lands, after their nations.” 151 And it is
added in reference to them all: “These are the families of the sons of Noah,
after their generations, in their nations; and by these were the nations
divided in the earth after the flood. And the whole earth was of one
language and of one speech.” 152 Now the addition of this sentence, “And the
whole earth was of one language and of one speech,” seems to indicate that
at the time when the nations were scattered over the earth they had all one

148
    Gen. 2. 8, 9.
149
    Gen. 2. 15.
150
    Gen. 10. 20.
151
    Gen. 10. 31.
152
    Gen. 10, 32; 11. 1.
language in common; but this is evidently inconsistent with the previous
words, “after their families, after their tongues.” For each family or nation
could not be said to have its own language if all had one language in
common. And so it is by way of recapitulation it is added, “And the whole
earth was of one language and of one speech,” the narrative here going
back, without indicating the change, to tell how it was, that from having one
language in common, the nations were divided into a multitude of tongues.
And, accordingly, we are forthwith told of the building of the tower, and of
this punishment being there laid upon them as the judgment of God upon
their arrogance; and it was after this that they were scattered over the
earth according to their tongues.
54. This recapitulation is found in a still more obscure form; as, for
example, our Lord says in the gospel: “The same day that Lot went out of
Sodom it rained fire from heaven, and destroyed them all. Even thus shall it
be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. In that day, he which shall
be upon the house-top, and his stuff in the house, let him not come down
to take it away; and he that is in the field, let him likewise not return back.
Remember Lot's wife.” 153 Is it when our Lord shall have been revealed that
men are to give heed to these sayings, and not to look behind them, that is,
not to long after the past life which they have renounced? Is not the
present rather the time to give heed to them, that when the Lord shall have
been revealed every man may receive his reward according to the things he
has given heed to or despised? And yet because Scripture says, “In that
day,” the time of the revelation of the Lord will be thought the time for
giving heed to these sayings, unless the reader be watchful and intelligent
so as to understand the recapitulation, in which he will be assisted by that
other passage of Scripture which even in the time of the apostles
proclaimed: “Little children, it is the last time.” 154 The very time then when
the gospel is preached, up to the time that the Lord shall be revealed, is
the day in which men ought to give heed to these sayings: for to the same
day, which shall be brought to a close by a day of judgment, belongs that
very revelation of the Lord here spoken of. 155
Chap. 37. The seventh rule of Tichonius
55. The seventh rule of Tichonius and the last, is about the devil and his
body. For he is the head of the wicked, who are in a sense his body, and
destined to go with him into the punishment of everlasting fire, just as
Christ is the head of the Church, which is His body, destined to be with Him
in His eternal kingdom and glory. Accordingly, as the first rule, which is
called of the Lord and His body, directs us, when Scripture speaks of one
and the same person, to take pains to understand which part of the

153
    Luke, 17. 29-32.
154
    I John, 2. 18.
155
    Cf. Rom. 2. 5.
statement applies to the head and which to the body; so this last rule
shows us that statements are sometimes made about the devil, whose
truth is not so evident in regard to himself as in regard to his body; and his
body is made up not only of those who are manifestly out of the way, but of
those also who, though they really belong to him, are for a time mixed up
with the Church, until they depart from this life, or until the chaff is
separated from the wheat at the last great winnowing. For example, what is
said in Isaiah, “How he is fallen from heaven, Lucifer, son of the morning!”
156
    and the other statements of the context which, under the figure of the
king of Babylon, are made about the same person, are of course to be
understood of the devil; and yet the statement which is made in the same
place, “He is ground down on the earth, who sendeth to all nations,” 157 does
not altogether fitly apply to the head himself. For, although the devil sends
his angels to all nations, yet it is his body, not himself, that is ground down
on the each, except that he himself is in his body, which is beaten small like
the dust which the wind blows from the face of the earth.
56. Now all these rules, except the one about the promises and the law,
make one meaning to be understood where another is expressed, which is
the peculiarity of figurative diction; and this kind of diction, it seems to me,
is too widely spread to be comprehended in its full extent by any one. For,
wherever one thing is said with the intention that another should be
understood we have a figurative expression, even though the name of the
trope is not to be found in the art of rhetoric. And when an expression of
this sort occurs where it is customary to find it, there is no trouble in
understanding it; when it occurs, however, where it is not customary, it
costs labor to understand it, from some more, from some less, just as men
have got more or less from God of the gifts of intellect, or as they have
access to more or fewer external helps. And, as in the case of proper words
which I discussed above, and in which things are to be understood just as
they are expressed, so in the case of figurative words, in which one thing is
expressed and another is to be understood, and which I have just finished
speaking of as much as I thought enough, students of these venerable
documents ought to be counselled not only to make themselves acquainted
with the forms of expression ordinarily used in Scripture, to observe them
carefully, and to remember them accurately, but also, what is especially and
before all things necessary, to pray that they may understand them. For in
these very books on the study of which they are intent, they read, “The Lord
giveth wisdom: out of His mouth cometh knowledge and understanding”; 158
and it is from Him they have received their very desire for knowledge, if it is
wedded to piety. But about signs, so far as relates to words, I have now said

156
    Isa. 14. 12 (Septuagint).
157
    Ibid.
158
    Prov. 2. 6.
enough. It remains to discuss, in the following book, so far as God has given
me light, the means of communicating our thoughts to others.


19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 1, AA 9-10 8d-1Oc; Q 3,
A 1, REP 1-5 14b-15b; A 2, REP 1-2 15c-16a; A 3, REP 1 16a-d; Q 13,
A 2, ANS and REP 1 63c-64d; A 3 64d-65c; A 6, ANS and REP 2
67d-68c; A 10, CONTRARY 72c-73c; Q 34, A 1, ANS and REP 1,4
185b-187b; Q 67, A 1 349d-350b; A 2, REP 3 350b-351a; Q 68, A 4,
ANS 358b-359b
AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q I, AA 9-10 8d-1Oc
Article 9. Whether Holy Scripture Should Use Metaphors?
We proceed thus to the Ninth Article: It seems that Holy Scripture should
not use metaphors.
Objection 1. For that which is proper to the lowest science seems not to be
appropriate to this science, which holds the highest place of all, as we have
said (A. 5). But to proceed by the aid of various likenesses and figures is
proper to poetry, the least of all the sciences. Therefore it is not fitting that
this science should make use of such likenesses.
Obj. 2. Further, this doctrine seems to be ordered to the manifestation of
truth. Hence a reward is held out to those who manifest it: They that
explain me shall have life everlasting (Ecclus. 24. 31). But by such likenesses
truth is obscured. Therefore to put forward divine truths by likening them to
corporeal things does not befit this science.
Obj. 3. Further, the higher creatures are, the nearer they approach to the
divine likeness. If therefore any creature be taken to represent God, this
representation ought chiefly to be taken from the higher creatures, and not
from the lower. Yet this is often found in the Scriptures.
On the contrary, It is written (Osee 12. 10): I have multiplied visions, and I
have used similitudes by the ministry of the prophets. But to put forward
anything by means of similitudes is to use metaphors. Therefore this sacred
science may use metaphors.
I answer that, It is befitting Holy Writ to put forward divine and spiritual
truths under the likenesses of material things. For God provides for
everything according to the capacity of its nature. Now it is natural to man
to attain to intellectual truths through sensible things, because all our
knowledge originates from sense. Hence in Holy Writ spiritual truths are
fittingly taught under the metaphors of material things. This is what
Dionysius says (Cœlest. Hierarch. i):159 “We cannot be enlightened by the
divine rays except they be hidden within the covering of many sacred veils.”


159
      Sect. 2 (PG 3, 121).
It is also befitting Holy Writ, which is proposed to all without distinction of
persons—To the wise and to the unwise I am a debtor (Rom. 1. 14)—that
spiritual truths be expounded by means of likenesses taken from corporeal
things, in order that thereby even the simple who are unable by themselves
to grasp intellectual things may be able to understand it.
Reply Obj. 1. Poetry makes use of metaphors to produce a representation,
for it is natural to man to be pleased with representations. But sacred
doctrine makes use of metaphors as both necessary and useful, as we have
said.
Reply Obj. 2. The ray of divine revelation is not extinguished by the sensible
imagery in which it is veiled, as Dionysius says (Cœlest Hierarch. i).160 And its
truth so far remains that it does not allow the minds of those to whom the
revelation has been made to rest in the likenesses, but raises them to the
knowledge of intelligible things. And through those to whom the revelation
has been made others also may receive instruction in these matters. Hence
those things that are taught metaphorically in one part of Scripture, in
other parts are taught more openly. The very hiding of truth in figures is
useful for the exercise of thoughtful minds, and as a defence against the
ridicule of the impious, according to the words Give not that which is holy to
dogs (Matt. 7. 6).
Reply Obj. 3. As Dionysius says, (loc. cit.)161 it is more fitting that divine truths
should be expounded under the figure of less noble than of nobler bodies,
and this for three reasons. First, because in this way men’s minds are the
better freed from error. For then it is clear that these things are not literal
descriptions of divine truths, which might have been open to doubt had
they been expressed under the figure of nobler bodies, especially for those
who did not know how to think of anything nobler than bodies. Secondly,
because this is more befitting the knowledge of God that we have in this
life. For what He is not is clearer to us than what He is. Therefore
likenesses drawn from things farthest away from God form within us a truer
estimate that God is above whatsoever we may say or think of Him. Thirdly,
because thereby divine truths are the better hidden from the unworthy.
Article 10. Whether in Holy Scripture a Word May Have Several Senses?
We proceed thus to the Tenth Article: It seems that in Holy Writ a word
cannot have several senses, historical or literal, allegorical, tropological or
moral, and anagogical.
Objection 1. For many different senses in one text produce confusion and
deception and destroy all force of argument. Hence no proof, but only
fallacies, can be deduced from a multiplicity of propositions. But Holy Writ
ought to be able to state the truth without any fallacy. Therefore there
cannot be several senses to a word in Holy Writ.
160
      Sect. 2 (PG 3, 121).
161
      PG 3, 136.
Obj. 2. Further, Augustine says (De util. cred. iii)162 that “the Old Testament
has a fourfold division namely, according to history, etiology, analogy, and
allegory.” Now these four seem altogether different from the four divisions
mentioned in the first objection. Therefore it does not seem fitting to
explain the same word of Holy Writ according to the four different senses
mentioned above.
Obj. 3. Further, besides these senses, there is the parabolical, which is not
one of these four.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral, XX, I):163 “Holy Writ by the manner of its
speech transcends every science, because in one and the same sentence,
while it describes a fact, it reveals a mystery.”
I answer that, The author of Holy Writ is God, in whose power it is to signify
His meaning not by words only (as man also can do), but also by things
themselves. So, whereas in every other science things are signified by
words, this science has the property that the things signified by the words
have themselves also a meaning. Therefore that first meaning whereby
words signify things belongs to the first sense, the historical or literal. That
meaning whereby things signified by words have themselves also a meaning
is called the spiritual sense, which is based on the literal, and presupposes
it.
Now this spiritual sense has a threefold division. For as the Apostle says
(Heb. 10. 1) the Old Law is a figure of the New Law, and Dionysius says 164 the
New Law itself is a figure of future glory. Again, in the New Law, whatever
our Head has done is a type of what we ought to do. Therefore, so far as
the things of the Old Law signify the things of the New Law, there is the
allegorical sense. But so far as the things done in Christ, or so far as the
things which signify Christ, are types of what we ought to do, there is the
moral sense. But so far as they signify what relates to eternal glory, there is
the anagogical sense.
Since the literal sense is that which the author intends, and since the
author of Holy Writ is God, Who by one act comprehends all things by His
intellect, it is not unfitting, as Augustine says 165 if, even according to the
literal sense, one word in Holy Writ should have several senses.
Reply Obj. 1. The multiplicity of these senses does not produce equivocation
or any other kind of multiplicity, seeing that these senses are not multiplied
because one word signifies several things, but because the things signified
by the words can be themselves types of other things. Thus in Holy Writ no
confusion results, for all the senses are founded on one—the literal—from
which alone can any argument be drawn, and not from those intended in

162
    PL 42, 68.
163
    PL 76, 135.
164
    De Eccl. Hier., V, 2 (PG 3, 501).
165
    Confessions, XII, 42 (PL 32, 844).
allegory, as Augustine says (Epist. xciii).166 Nevertheless, nothing of Holy
Scripture perishes on account of this, since nothing necessary to faith is
contained under the spiritual sense which is not elsewhere put forward by
the Scripture in its literal sense.
Reply Obj. 2. These three—history, etiology, analogy—are grouped under the
literal sense. For it is called history, as Augustine expounds 167 whenever
anything is simply related; it is called etiology when its cause is assigned, as
when Our Lord gave the reason why Moses allowed the putting away of
wives—namely, on account of the hardness of men's hearts (Matt. 19. 8); it
is called analogy whenever the truth of one text of Scripture is shown not
to contradict the truth of another. Of these four, allegory alone stands for
the three spiritual senses. Thus Hugh of S. Victor ( Sacram. 1, 4)168 includes
the anagogical under the allegorical sense, laying down three senses
only—the historical, the allegorical, and the tropological.
Reply Obj. 3. The parabolical sense is contained in the literal, for by words
things are signified properly and figuratively. Nor is the figure itself, but that
which is figured, the literal sense. When Scripture speaks of God's arm, the
literal sense is not that God has such a member, but only what is signified
by this member, namely, operative power. Hence it is plain that nothing false
can ever underlie the literal sense of Holy Writ.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 3, A 1, REP 1-5 14b-15b
Article 1. Whether God Is a Body?
We proceed thus to the First Article: It seems that God is a body.
Objection 1. For a body is that which has three dimensions. But Holy
Scripture attributes three dimensions to God, for it is written: He is higher
than Heaven, and what wilt thou do? He is deeper than Hell, and how wilt
thou know? The measure of Him is longer than the earth and broader than
the sea (Job 11. 8, 9). Therefore God is a body.
Obj. 2. Further, everything that has figure is a body, since figure is a quality
of quantity. But God seems to have figure, for it is written: Let us make man
to our image and likeness (Gen 1. 26). Now a figure is called an image,
according to the text: Who being the brightness of His glory and the figure
i.e., the image of His substance (Heb. 1. 3). Therefore God is a body.
Obj. 3. Further, whatever has corporeal parts is a body. Now Scripture
attributes corporeal parts to God. Hast thou an arm like God? (Job 40. 4);
and The eyes of the Lord are upon the just (Ps. 33. 16); and The right hand of
the Lord hath wrought strength (Ps. 117. 16). Therefore God is a body.



166
    Chap. 8 (PL 33, 334).
167
    De Util. Cred., 3 (PL 42, 68).
168
    PL 176, 184; Cf. De Scriptur. et Scriptor. Sacris., III (PL 175, II).
Obj. 4. Further, posture belongs only to bodies. But something which
supposed posture is said of God in the Scriptures: I saw the Lord sitting (Isa.
6. 1), and He standeth up to judge (Isa. 3. 13). Therefore God is a body.
Obj. 5. Further, only bodies or things corporeal can be a local term from
which or to which. But in the Scriptures God is spoken of as a local term to
which, according to the words, Come ye to Him and be enlightened (Ps. 23.
6), and as a term from which: All they that depart from Thee shall be written
in the earth (Jer. 17. 13). Therefore God is a body.
On the contrary, It is written in the Gospel of St. John (4. 24): God is a spirit.
I answer that, It is absolutely true that God is not a body; and this can be
shown in three ways. First, because no body is in motion unless it be put in
motion, as is evident from induction. Now it has been already proved (Q. II,
A. 3), that God is the First Mover unmoved. Therefore it is clear that God is
not a body.
Secondly, because the first being must of necessity be in act, and in no way
in potency. For although in one and the same thing that passes from
potency to act, the potency is prior in time to the act, nevertheless,
absolutely speaking, act is prior to potency. For whatever is in potency can
be reduced to act only by some being in act. Now it has been already
proved that God is the First Being. It is therefore impossible that in God
there should be anything in potency. But every body is in potency, because
the continuous, as such, is divisible to infinity. It is therefore impossible
that God should be a body.
Thirdly, because God is the most noble of beings as is clear from what was
said above (Q. II, A. 3). Now it is impossible for a body to be the most noble
of beings, for a body must be either animate inanimate, and an animate
body is manifestly nobler than any inanimate body. But an animate body is
not animate in so far as it is a body. Otherwise all bodies would be animate.
Therefore its animation depends upon some other thing, as our body
depends for its animation on the soul. Hence that by which a body becomes
animated must be nobler than the body. Therefore it is impossible that God
should be a body.
Reply Obj. 1. As we have said above (Q. I, A. 9.), Holy Writ puts before us
spiritual and divine things under the likenesses of corporeal things. Hence,
when it attributes to God the three dimensions under the likeness of
corporeal quantity, it designates His virtual quantity; thus, by depth, it
signifies His power of knowing hidden things; by height, the excellence of
His power over all things; by length, the duration of His being; by breadth,
His act of love for all. Or, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom. ix.),169 by the depth of
God is meant the incomprehensibility of His essence, by length, the



169
      Sect. 9 (PG 3, 913).
procession of His all-pervading power, by breadth, His overspreading all
things, since, namely, all things lie under His protection.
Reply Obj. 2. Man is said to be after the image of God not as regards his
body, but as regards that whereby he excels other animals. Hence, when it
is said, Let us make man to our image and likeness, it is added, And let him
have dominion over the fishes of the sea (Gen. 1. 26). Now man excels all
animals by his reason and intelligence. Hence it is according to his
intelligence and reason, which are incorporeal, that man is said to be
according to the image of God.
Reply Obj. 3. Corporeal parts are attributed to God in Scripture on account
of His actions, and this is owing to a certain likeness. For instance the act
of the eye is to see; hence the eye attributed to God signifies His power of
seeing intellectually, not sensibly, and so on with the other parts.
Reply Obj. 4. Whatever pertains to posture, also, is only attributed to God by
some sort of likeness. He is spoken of as sitting, on account of His
unchangeableness and dominion, and as standing, on account of His power
of overcoming whatever withstands Him.
Reply Obj. 5. We draw near to God by no corporeal steps, since He is
everywhere, but by the affections of our mind, and in the same way we
withdraw from Him. Thus, to draw near or to withdraw signifies merely
spiritual affections based on the likeness of local motion.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 3, A 2, REP 1-2 15c-16a
Article 2. Whether God Is Composed of Matter and Form?
We proceed thus to the Second Article: It seems that God is composed of
matter and form.
Objection 1. For whatever has a soul is composed of matter and form, since
the soul is the form of the body. But Scripture attributes a soul to God, for
it is mentioned in Hebrews (10. 38), where God says: But My just man liveth
by faith; but if he withdraw himself, he shall not please My soul. Therefore
God is composed of matter and form.
Obj. 2. Further, anger, joy, and the like are passions of the composite as is
said in the book on the Soul.170 But these are attributed to God in Scripture:
The Lord was exceeding angry with His people (Ps. 105. 40). Therefore God is
composed of matter and form.
Obj. 3. Further, matter is the principle of individuation. But God seems to be
individual, for He is not predicated of many. Therefore He is composed of
matter and form.
On the contrary, Whatever is composed of matter and form is a body; for
dimensive quantity is what first inheres in matter. But God is not a body as


170
      Aristotle, 1, 1 (403 a3).
proved in the preceding Article. Therefore He is not composed of matter and
form.
I answer that, It is impossible that matter should exist in God. First,
because matter is that which is in potency. But we have shown (Q. II, A. 3)
that God is pure act, without any potentiality. Hence it is impossible that
God should be composed of matter and form.
Secondly, because everything composed of matter and form is perfect and
good through its form. Therefore its goodness is participated, according as
matter participates the form. Now the first good and the best—namely
God—is not a participated good, because the essential good is prior to the
participated good. Hence it is impossible that God should be composed of
matter and form.
Thirdly, because every agent acts by its form. Hence the manner in which it
has its form is the manner in which it is an agent. Therefore whatever is
primarily and essentially an agent must be primarily and essentially form.
Now God is the first agent, since He is the first efficient cause as we have
shown (Q. II, A. 3). He is therefore of His essence a form, and not composed
of matter and form.
Reply Obj. 1. A soul is attributed to God because His acts resemble the acts
of a soul; for, that we will anything, is due to our soul. Hence what is
pleasing to His will is said to be pleasing to His soul.
Reply Obj. 2. Anger and the like are attributed to God on account of a
likeness of effect. Thus, because to punish is properly the act of an angry
man, God’s punishment is metaphorically spoken of as His anger.
Reply Obj. 3. Forms which can be received in matter are individualized by
matter, which cannot be in another since it is the first underlying subject;
but form of itself, unless something else prevents it, can be received by
many. But that form which cannot be received in matter, but is
self-subsisting, is individualized precisely because it cannot be received in
another; and such a form is God. Hence it does not follow that matter
exists in God.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 3, A 3, REP 1 16a-d
Article 3. Whether God Is the Same As His Essence or Nature?
We proceed thus to the Third Article: It seems that God is not the same as
His essence or nature.
Objection 1. For nothing is in itself. But the essence or nature of God, which
is the Godhead, is said to be in God. Therefore it seems that God is not the
same as His essence or nature.
Obj. 2. Further, the effect is likened to its cause, for every agent produced
its like. But in created things the suppositum is not identical with its nature,
for a man is not the same as his humanity. Therefore God is not the same
as His Godhead.
On the contrary, It is said of God that He is life, and not only that He is
living: I am the way, the truth, and the life (John 14. 6). Now the relation
between Godhead and God is the same as the relation between life and a
living thing. Therefore God is His very Godhead.
I answer that, God is the same as His essence or nature. To understand this,
it must be noted that in things composed of matter and form, the nature or
essence must differ from the suppositum, because the essence or nature
comprises in itself only what is included in the definition of the species; as,
humanity comprises in itself all that is included in the definition of man, for
it is by this that man is man, and it is this that humanity signifies, that,
namely, whereby man is man.Now individual matter, with all its
individualizing accidents, is not included in the definition of the species.
One of the elements in this defect in imitation is that what is one and
simple can be represented only by many things. And so there comes about
in these effects composition, which renders suppositum distinct from
nature in them. For this flesh, these bones, this blackness or whiteness,
etc., are not included in the definition of a man. Therefore this flesh, these
bones, and the accidents designating this matter, are not included in
humanity; and yet they are included in the thing which is a man. Hence the
thing which is a man has something in it which humanity does not have.
Consequently humanity and a man are not wholly the same, but humanity is
taken to mean the formal part of a man, because the principles by which a
thing is defined are as the formal constituent in relation to the
individualizing matter.
On the other hand, in things not composed of matter and form, in which
individualization is not due to individual matter—that is to say, to this
matter—the very forms being individualized of themselves,—it is necessary
that the forms themselves should be subsisting supposita. Therefore
suppositum and nature do not differ in them as we have shown above (A.
2.). Since God then is not composed of matter and form, He must be His
own Godhead, His own Life, and whatever else is thus predicated of Him.
Reply Obj. 1. We can speak of simple things only as though they were like
the composite things from which we derive our knowledge. Therefore, in
speaking of God, we use concrete nouns to signify His subsistence, because
with us only those things subsist which are composite; and we use abstract
nouns to signify His simplicity. In saying therefore that Godhead, or life, or
the like are in God, it must be ascribed to the diversity which lies in the way
our intellect receives, and not to any diversity in reality.
Reply Obj. 2. The effects of God do not imitate Him perfectly, but only as far
as they are able.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 13, A 2, ANS and REP 1 63c-64d
Article 2. Whether Any Name Can Be Applied to God Substantially?
We proceed thus to the Second Article: It seems that no name can be
applied to God substantially.
Objection 1. For Damascene says (De Fid. Orth. i, 9):171 “Everything said of God
signifies not His substance, but rather shows forth what He is not; or
expresses some relation, or something following from His nature or
operation.”
Obj. 2. Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i)172: “You will find a chorus of all
the holy doctors addressed to the end of distinguishing clearly and
praiseworthily the divine processions in the denominations of God.” Thus
the names applied by the holy doctors in praising God are distinguished
according to the divine processions themselves. But what expresses the
procession of anything does not signify anything pertaining to its essence.
Therefore the names applied to God are not said of Him substantially.
Obj. 3. Further, a thing is named by us according as we understand it. But
God is not understood by us in this life in His substance. Therefore neither
is any name we can use applied substantially to God.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. vi)173: “The being of God is the being
strong, or the being wise, or whatever else we may say of that simplicity
whereby His substance is signified.” Therefore all names of this kind signify
the divine substance.
I answer that, Negative names applied to God or signifying His relation to
creatures manifestly do not at ail signify His substance, but rather express
the distance of the creature from Him, or His relation to something else, or
rather, the relation of creatures to Himself.
But as regards absolute and affirmative names of God, such as good, wise,
and the like, various and many opinions have been given. For some have
said that all such names, although they are applied to God affirmatively,
nevertheless have been brought into use more to express some remotion
from God rather than to place anything in Him. Hence they assert that when
we say that God lives, we mean that God is not like an inanimate thing, and
the same in like manner applies to other names; and this was taught by
Rabbi Moses.174 Others175 say that these names applied to God signify His
relationship towards creatures; thus in the words, “God is good,” we mean,
God is the cause of goodness in things; and the same rule applies to other
names.
Both of these opinions, however, seem to be untrue for three reasons. First
because in neither of them can a reason be assigned why some names
more than others are applied to God. For He is assuredly the cause of

171
    PG 94, 833.
172
    Sect. 4 (PG 3, 589).
173
    Chap. 4 (PL 42, 927).
174
    Guide, 1, 58 (FR 82).
175
    Alan of Lille, Theol. Reg., reg. 21, 26 (PL 210, 631, 633).
bodies in the same way as He is the cause of good things; therefore if the
words “God is good,” signified no more than, “God is the cause of good
things,’' it might in like manner be said that God is a body, since He is the
cause of bodies. So also to say that He is a body, takes away the notion that
He is being in potency only as is prime matter. Secondly, because it would
follow that all names applied to God would be said of Him by way of being
taken in a secondary sense, as healthy is secondarily said of medicine,
because it signifies only the cause of health in the animal which primarily is
called healthy. Thirdly, because this is against the intention of those who
speak of God, For in saying that God lives, they assuredly mean more than
to say that He is the cause of our life, or that He differs from inanimate
bodies.
Therefore we must hold a different doctrine—namely, that these names
signify the divine substance and are predicated substantially of God,
although they fall short of a full representation of Him. Which is proved
thus. For these names express God so far as our intellects know Him. Now
since our intellect knows God from creatures, it knows Him as far as
creatures represent Him. Now it was shown above (Q. IV, A. 2) that God
possesses beforehand in Himself all the perfections of creatures, being
Himself absolutely and universally perfect. Hence every creature represents
Him, and is like Him so far as it possesses some perfection; yet it
represents Him not as something of the same species or genus, but as the
excelling principle of whose form the effects fall short, although they derive
some kind of likeness to it, even as the forms of inferior bodies represent
the power of the sun. This was explained above (Q. IV, A. 3), in treating of
the divine perfection. Therefore these names signify the divine substance,
but in an imperfect manner, even as creatures represent it imperfectly.
So when we say, “God is good,” the meaning is not, “God is the cause of
goodness,” or “God is not evil,” but the meaning is, “Whatever good we
attribute to creatures pre-exists in God,” and in a higher way. Hence it does
not follow that God is good because He causes goodness, but rather, on the
contrary, He pours out goodness in things because He is good, according to
what Augustine says, 176 “Because He is good, we are.”
Reply Obj. 1. Damascene says that these names do not signify what God is,
since by none of these names is perfectly expressed what He is, but each
one signifies Him in an imperfect manner, even as creatures represent Him
imperfectly.
Reply Obj. 2. In the signification of names, that from which the name is
derived is different sometimes from what it is intended to signify, as for
instance this name “stone” (lapis) is imposed from the fact that it hurts the
foot (lœdit pedem); but it is not imposed to signify that which hurts the

176
      Christian Doctrine, 1, 32 (PL 34, 32).
foot, but rather to signify a certain kind of body; otherwise everything that
hurts the foot would be a stone. So we must say that these kinds of divine
names are imposed from the divine processions; for as according to the
diverse processions of their perfections, creatures are the representations
of God, although in an imperfect manner, so likewise our intellect knows
and names God according to each kind of procession. But nevertheless
these names are not imposed to signify the processions themselves, as if
when we say “God lives,” the senses were, “life proceeds from Him,” but to
signify the principle itself of things, in so far as life pre-exists in Him,
although it pre-exists in Him in a more eminent way than can be
understood or signified.
Reply Obj. 3. We cannot know the essence of God in this life, as He really is
in Himself; but we know Him according as He is represented in the
perfections of creatures; and thus the names imposed by us signify Him in
that manner only.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 13, A 3 64d-65c
Article 3. Whether Any Name Can Be Applied to God Properly?
We proceed thus to the Third Article: It seems that no name is applied
properly to God.
Objection 1. For all names which we apply to God are taken from creatures,
as was explained above (A. 1). But the names of creatures are applied to
God metaphorically, as when we say, God is a stone, or a lion, or the like.
Therefore names are applied to God in a metaphorical sense.
Obj. 2. Further, no name can be applied literally to anything if it should be
withheld from it rather than given to it. But all such names as good, wise,
and the like, are more truly withheld from God than given to Him, as
appears from what Dionysius says (Cœl. Hier. ii).177 Therefore none of these
names belong to God in their proper sense.
Obj. 3. Further, corporeal names are applied to God in a metaphorical sense
only, since He is incorporeal. But all such names imply some kind of
corporeal condition, for their meaning is bound up with time and
composition and like corporeal conditions. Therefore all these names are
applied to God in a metaphorical sense.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Fide, ii),178 “Some names there are which
express evidently the property of the divinity, and some which express the
clear truth of the divine majesty, but others there are which are applied to
God figuratively by way of similitude.” Therefore not all names are applied to
God in a metaphorical sense, but there are some which are said of Him in
their proper sense.

177
      Sect. 3 (PG 3, 141).
178
      Prologue (PL 16, 583).
I answer that, According to the preceding article, our knowledge of God is
derived from the perfections which flow from Him to creatures, which
perfections are in God in a more eminent way than in creatures. Now our
intellect apprehends them as they are in creatures, and as it apprehends
them it signifies them by names. Therefore as to the names applied to God,
there are two things to be considered—namely, the perfections which they
signify, such as goodness, life, and the like, and their mode of signification.
As regards what is signified by these names, they belong properly to God,
and more properly than they belong to creatures, and are applied primarily
to Him. But as regards their mode of signification, they do not properly and
strictly apply to God, for their mode of signification applies to creatures.
Reply Obj. 1. There are some names which signify these perfections flowing
from God to creatures in such a way that the imperfect way in which
creatures receive the divine perfection is part of the very signification of the
name itself, as stone signifies a material being, and names of this kind can
be applied to God only in a metaphorical sense. Other names, however,
express these perfections absolutely, without any such mode of
participation being part of their signification, as the words being, good,
living, and the like, and such names can be properly applied to God.
Reply Obj. 2. Such names as these, as Dionysius shows, are denied of God
for the reason that what the name signifies does not belong to Him in the
ordinary sense of its signification, but in a more eminent way. Hence
Dionysius says also that God is “above all substance and all life.”
Reply Obj. 3. These names which are applied to God properly imply
corporeal conditions not in the thing signified, but as regards their mode of
signification; but those which are applied to God metaphorically imply and
mean a corporeal condition in the thing signified.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 13, A 6, ANS and REP 2 67d-68c
Article 6. Whether Names Are Predicated Primarily of Creatures Rather
Than of God?
We proceed thus to the Sixth Article: It seems that names are predicated
primarily of creatures rather than of God.
Objection 1. For we name anything accordingly as we know it, since names,
as the Philosopher says, 179 are signs of ideas. But we know creatures before
we know God. Therefore the names imposed by us are predicated primarily
of creatures rather than of God.
Obj. 2. Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. i)180 that we name God from
creatures. But names transferred from creatures to God are said primarily
of creatures rather than of God, as lion, stone, and the like. Therefore all

179
      Interpretation, I (16a3).
180
      Sect. 6 (PG 3, 596).
names applied to God and creatures are applied primarily to creatures
rather than to God.
Obj. 3. Further, all names applied in common to God and creatures, “are
applied to God as the cause of all things,” as Dionysius says ( De Myst.
Theol.).181 But what is said of anything through its cause is applied to it
secondarily; for “healthy” is primarily said of animal rather than of medicine,
which is the cause of health. therefore these names are said primarily of
creatures rather than of God.
On the contrary, It is written, I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, of Whom all paternity in heaven and earth is named (Eph. 3. 14, 15);
and the same applies to the other names applied to God and creatures.
Therefore these names are applied primarily to God rather than to
creatures.
I answer that, In all names which are said of many in an analogical sense,
they must all be said with reference to one thing, and therefore this one
thing must be placed in the definition of them all. And since “the nature
expressed by the name is the definition,” as the Philosopher says, 182 such a
name must be said primarily of that which is put in the definition of such
other things, and secondarily to these others according to the order in
which they approach more or less to that first. Thus, for instance, healthy
applied to animals comes into the definition of healthy applied to medicine,
which is called healthy as being the cause of health in the animal, and also
into the definition of healthy which is applied to urine, which is called
healthy in so far as it is the sign of the animal's health.
Thus, all names which are said metaphorically of God, are said of creatures
primarily rather than of God, because when said of God they mean only
likenesses to such creatures. For as smiling said of a field means only that
the field in the beauty of its flowering is like to the beauty of the human
smile according to the likeness of proportion, so the name of lion said of
God means only that God manifests strength in His works, as a lion in his.
Thus it is clear that as they are said of God the signification of names can
be defined only from what is said of creatures.
But to other names not said of God in a metaphorical sense, the same rule
would apply if they were spoken of God as the cause only, as some have
supposed.183 For when it is said, "God is good," it would then only mean,
"God is the cause of the creature's goodness"; thus the term good applied
to God would included in its meaning the creature's goodness. Hence good
would apply primarily to creatures rather than God. But as was shown
above (A. 2), these names are applied to God not as the cause only, but also
essentially. For the words, "God is good," or "wise," signify not only that He is

181
    1, 2 (PG 3, 1000).
182
    Metaphysics, IV, 7(1012 a23).
183
    Alan of Lille, Theol. Reg., REG. 21, 26 (PL 210, 631, 633).
the cause of wisdom or goodness, but that these pre-exist in Him in a more
excellent way. Hence as regards the things which the name signifies, these
names are applied primarily to God rather than to creatures, because these
perfections flow from God to creatures; but as regards the imposition of
the names, they are primarily applied by us to creatures, which we know
first. Hence they have a mode of signification which belongs to creatures, as
said above (A. 3).
Reply Obj. 1. This objection refers to the imposition of the name.
Reply Obj. 2. The same rule does not apply to metaphorical and to other
names, as said above.
Reply Obj. 3. This objection would be valid if these names were said of God
only as cause, and not also essentially, for instance as healthy is applied to
medicine.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 13, A 10, CONTRARY 72c-73c
Article 10. Whether This Name God Is Applied to God Univocally, by
Nature, by Participation, and According to Opinion?
We proceed thus to the Tenth Article: It seems that this name God is applied
to God univocally by nature, by participation, and according to opinion.
Objection 1. For where a diverse signification exists, there is no contradiction
of affirmation and negation; for equivocation prevents contradiction. But a
Catholic who says: “An idol is not God,” contradicts a pagan who says: “An
idol is God.” Therefore God in both senses is spoken of univocally.
Obj. 2. Further, as an idol is God in opinion, and not in truth, so the
enjoyment of carnal pleasures is called happiness in opinion, and not in
truth. But this name happiness is applied univocally to this supposed
happiness, and also to true happiness. Therefore also this name God is
applied univocally to the true God, and to God also in opinion.
Obj. 3. Further, names are called univocal because they contain one idea.
Now when a Catholic says: “There is one God,” he understands by the name
God an omnipotent being, and one venerated above all; while the heathen
understands the same when he says: “An idol is God.” Therefore this name
God is applied univocally to both.
On the contrary, That which is in the intellect is the likeness of what is in
the thing as is said in Interpretation.184 But the word animal applied to a
true animal and to a picture of one is equivocal. Therefore this name God
applied to the true God and to God in opinion is applied equivocally.
Further, No one can signify what he does not know. But the heathen does
not know the divine nature. So when he says an idol is God, he does not
signify the true Deity. On the other hand, a Catholic signifies the true Deity


184
      Aristotle, I (16a5).
when he says that there is one God. Therefore this name God is not applied
univocally, but equivocally to the true God, and to God according to opinion.
I answer that, This name God in the three above significations is taken
neither univocally nor equivocally, but analogically. This is apparent from
this reason. Univocal terms mean absolutely the same thing, but equivocal
terms absolutely different things; but in analogical terms a word taken in
one signification must be placed in the definition of the same word taken in
other senses; as, for instance, being which is applied to substance is placed
in the definition of being as applied to accident; and healthy applied to
animal is placed in the definition of healthy as applied to urine and
medicine. For urine is the sign of health in the animal, and medicine is the
cause of health.
The same applies to the question at issue. For this name God, as signifying
the true God, includes the idea of God when it is used to denote God in
opinion, or participation. For when we name anyone god by participation, we
understand by the name of god some likeness of the true God. Likewise,
when we call an idol god, by this name god we understand and signify
something which men think is God; thus it is manifest that the name has
different meanings, but that one of them is comprised in the other
significations. Hence it is manifestly said analogically.
Reply Obj. 1. The multiplication of names does not depend on the
predication of the name, but on the signification: for this name man, of
whomsoever it is predicated, whether truly or falsely, is predicated in one
sense. But it would be multiplied if by the name man we meant to signify
different things; for instance, if one meant to signify by this name man
what man really is, and another meant to signify by the same name a stone,
or something else. Hence it is evident that a Catholic saying that an idol is
not God contradicts the pagan asserting that it is God; because each of
them uses this name God to signify the true God. For when the pagan says
an idol is God, he does not use this name as meaning God in opinion, for he
would then speak the truth, as also Catholics sometimes use the name in
the sense, as in the Psalm, All the gods of the Gentiles are demons (Ps. 95.
5).
The same remark applies to the second and third Objections. For those
reasons proceed from the different predication of the name, and not from
its various significations.
Reply Obj. 4. The term animal applied to a true and a pictured animal is not
purely equivocal; for the Philosopher 185 takes equivocal names in a large
sense, including analogous names; because also being, which is predicated
analogically, is sometimes said to be predicated equivocally of different
predicaments.

185
      Categories, I (1a1).
Reply Obj. 5. Neither a Catholic nor a pagan knows the very nature of God as
it is in itself, but each one knows it according to some idea of causality, or
excellence, or remotion (Q. XII, A. 12). So the Gentile can take this name God
in the same way when he says an idol is God as the Catholic does in saying
an idol is not God. But if anyone should be quite ignorant of God altogether,
he could not even name Him, unless, perhaps, as we use names the
meaning of which we know not.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 34, A 1, ANS and REP 1, 4
185b-187b
Article 1. Whether Word in God Is a Personal Name?
We proceed thus to the First Article: It would seem that Word in God is not a
personal name.
Objection 1. For personal names are applied to God in a proper sense, as
Father and Son. But “Word is applied to God metaphorically,” as Origen
says186 on (John 1. 1), In the beginning was the Word. Therefore Word is not a
personal name in God.
Obj. 2. Further, according to Augustine (De Trin. ix, 10),187 “The Word is
knowledge with love”; and according to Anselm (Monol.),188 to speak is to
the Supreme Spirit nothing but to see by thought. But knowledge and
thought, and sight, are essential terms in God. Therefore Word is not a
personal term in God.
Obj. 3. Further, it is essential to word to be spoken. But, according to
Anselm (ibid. lxii), as the Father is intelligent, the Son intelligent, and the
Holy Ghost intelligent, so the Father speaks, the Son speaks, and the Holy
Ghost speaks; and likewise, each one of them is spoken. Therefore, the
name Word is used as an essential term in God, and not in a personal
sense.
Obj. 4. Further, no divine person is made. But the Word of God is something
made. For it is said, Fire, hail, snow, ice, the storms which do His Word (Ps.
148. 8). Therefore the Word is not a personal name in God.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Trin. vii, 2):189 “As the Son is related to
the Father, so also is the Word to Him Whose Word He is.” But Son is a
personal name, since it is said relatively. Therefore so also is Word.
I answer that, The name of Word in God, if taken in its proper sense, is a
personal name, and in no way an essential name.
To see how this is true, we must know that our own word taken in its
proper sense has a threefold meaning, while in a fourth sense it is taken
improperly or figuratively. The clearest and most common sense is when it

186
    PG 14, 59.
187
    PL 42, 969.
188
    Chap. 63 (PL 158, 208).
189
    PL 42, 936.
is said of the word spoken by the voice; and this proceeds from an interior
source as regards two things found in the exterior word—that is, the vocal
sound itself, and the signification of the sound. For, according to the
Philosopher,190 vocal sound signifies the concept of the intellect. Again the
vocal sound proceeds from the signification or the imagination, as stated in
the book on the Soul.191 The vocal sound, which has no signification, cannot
be called a word: hence the exterior vocal sound is called a word because it
signifies the interior concept of the mind. Thus, therefore first and chiefly,
the interior concept of the mind is called a word; secondarily, the vocal
sound itself, signifying the interior concept, is so called; and thirdly, the
imagination of the vocal sound is called a word. Damascene mentions these
three kinds of words (De Fide Orthod. i, 13),192 saying that “word is called the
natural movement of the intellect, whereby it is moved, and understands,
and thinks, as light and splendour,” which is the first kind. “Again,” he says,
“the word is what is not pronounced by a vocal word, but is uttered in the
heart,” which is the third kind. “Again,” also, “the word is the angel”—that is,
the messenger “of intelligence,” which is the second kind. Word is also used
in a fourth way figuratively for that which is signified or effected by a word;
thus we are accustomed to say, “this is the word I have said to you,” or
“which the king has commanded,” alluding to some deed signified by the
word either by way of assertion or of command.
Now word is taken properly in God as signifying the concept of the intellect.
Hence Augustine says (De Trin. xv, 10): 193 “Whoever can understand the word
not only before it is sounded, but also before thought has clothed it with
imaginary sound, can already see some likeness of that Word of Whom it is
said: In the beginning was the Word.” The concept itself of the heart has the
nature of proceeding from something other than itself—namely, from the
knowledge of the one conceiving. Hence Word, according as we use the
term properly of God, signifies something proceeding from another, which
belongs to the nature of personal terms in God, since the divine persons are
distinguished by origin (Q. XXVII, Introd.; Q. XXXII, A. 3). Hence the term
“Word,” according as we use the term properly of God, is to be taken as said
not essentially, but personally only.
Reply Obj. 1. The Arians, who sprang from Origen, 194 declared that the Son
differed in substance from the Father. Hence, they endeavoured to maintain
that when the Son of God is called the Word this is not to be understood in
a proper sense, lest the idea of the Word proceeding should compel them
to confess that the Son of God is of the same substance as the Father. For

190
    Interpretation, I (16a3).
191
    Aristotle, II, 8 (420b32).
192
    PG 94, 857.
193
    PL 42, 1071.
194
    In Joann., II (PG 14, 109).
the interior word proceeds in such a manner from the one who pronounces
it as to remain within him. But supposing Word to be said metaphorically of
God, we must still admit Word in its proper sense. For if a thing be called a
word metaphorically, this can only be by reason of some manifestation;
either it makes something manifest as a word, or it is manifested by a word.
If manifested by a word, there must exist a word whereby it is manifested.
If it is called a word because it exteriorly manifests, what it exteriorly
manifests cannot be called word except in as far as it signifies the interior
concept of the mind, which anyone may also manifest by exterior signs.
Therefore, although Word may be sometimes said of God metaphorically,
nevertheless we must also admit Word in the proper sense, which is said
personally.
Reply Obj. 2. Nothing belonging to the intellect can be applied to God
personally except word alone, for word alone signifies that which emanates
from another. For what the intellect forms in its conception is the word.
Now, the intellect itself, according as it is put in act by the intelligible
species, is considered absolutely; likewise the act of understanding which is
to the intellect in act what being is to being in act, since the act of
understanding does not signify an act going out from the intelligent agent,
but an act remaining in the agent. Therefore when we say that word is
knowledge, the term knowledge does not mean the act of a knowing
intellect, or any one of its habits, but stands for what the intellect
conceives by knowing. Hence also Augustine says (De Trin. vii, 2)195 that the
Word is “begotten wisdom,” for it is nothing but the concept of the Wise
One; and in the same way It can be called “begotten knowledge.” Thus also
can be explained how to speak is in God to see by thought, since the Word
is conceived by the gaze of the divine thought. Still the term thought does
not properly apply to the Word of God. For Augustine says ( De Trin. xv, 16)196:
“Therefore do we speak of the Word of God, and not of the Thought of God,
lest we believe that in God there is something unstable, now assuming the
form of Word, now putting off that form and remaining latent and as it were
formless.” For thought consists properly in the search after truth, and this
has no place in God. But when the intellect attains to the form of truth, it
does not think, but perfectly contemplates the truth. Hence Anselm ( loc.
cit.) takes thought in an improper sense for contemplation.
Reply Obj. 3. As, properly speaking, Word in God is said personally, and not
essentially, so likewise is “to speak.” Hence, as the Word is not common to
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, so it is not true that the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost are one speaker. So Augustine says (De Trin. vii, 1): 197 “That
co-eternal Word is understood as not alone in God.” On the other hand, “to

195
    PL 42, 936.
196
    PL 42, 1079.
197
    PL 42, 933.
be spoken” belongs to each Person, for not only is the word spoken, but
also the thing understood or signified by the word. Therefore in this manner
to one person alone in God does it belong to be spoken in the same way as
a word is spoken; but in the way whereby a thing is spoken as being
understood in the word, it belongs to each Person to be spoken. For the
Father, by understanding Himself, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and all other
things comprised in this knowledge, conceives the Word, so that thus the
whole Trinity is spoken in the Word, and likewise also all creatures; just as
the intellect of a man by the word he conceives in the act of understanding
a stone, speaks a stone. Anselm took the term speak improperly for the act
of understanding, whereas they really from each other; for “to understand”
means only the relation of the intelligent agent to the thing understood, in
which relation no notion of origin is conveyed, but only a certain informing
of our intellect, according as our intellect is put in act by the form of the
thing understood. In God, however, it means complete identity, because in
God the intellect and the thing understood are altogether the same, as was
proved above (Q. XIV, AA. 2, 4). But to speak means chiefly the relation to
the word conceived, for to speak is nothing but to utter a word. But by
means of the word it signifies a relation to the thing understood which in
the word uttered is manifested to the one who understands. Thus, only the
Person who utters the Word is speaker in God, although each Person
understands and is understood, and consequently is spoken by the Word.
Reply Obj. 4. The term word is taken there figuratively, as the thing signified
or effected by word is called word. For thus creatures are said to do the
word of God, as executing any effect to which they are ordained by the
word conceived of the divine wisdom; just as anyone is said to do the word
of the king when he does the work to which he is appointed by the king's
word.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 67, A 1 349d-350b
Article 1. Whether the Word Light Is Used in Its Proper Sense in
Speaking of Spiritual Things?
We proceed thus to the First Article: It would seem that light is used in its
proper sense in spiritual things.
Objection 1. For Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. iv, 28)198 that in spiritual things
“light is better and surer; and that Christ is not called Light in the same
sense as He is called the Stone; the former is to be taken literally, and the
latter figuratively.”
Obj. 2. Further, Dionysius (Div. Nom. iv)199 includes Light among the
intelligible names of God. But such names are used in their proper sense in

198
      PL 34, 415.
199
      Sect. 5 (PG 3, 700).
spiritual things. Therefore light is used in its proper sense in spiritual
matters.
Obj. 3. Further, the Apostle says (Eph. 5. 13): All that is made manifest is
light. But to be made manifest belongs more properly to spiritual things
than to corporeal. Therefore also does light.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Fid. ii)200 that Splendour is among those
things which are said of God metaphorically.
I answer that, Any word may be used in two ways—that is to say, either in
its original application or according to custom. This is clearly shown in the
word “sight,” originally applied to the act of the sense, and then, as sight is
the noblest and most trustworthy of the senses, extended in common
speech to all knowledge obtained through the other senses. Thus we say,
“See how it tastes,” or smells, or is hot. Further, sight is applied to
knowledge obtained through the intellect, as in those words: Blessed are
the clean of heart, for they shall see God (Matt. 5. 8). And thus it is with the
word light. In its primary meaning it signifies that which makes manifest to
the sense of sight; afterwards it was extended to that which makes
manifest to knowledge of any kind. If, then, the word is taken in its strict
and primary meaning, it is to be understood metaphorically when applied to
spiritual things, as Ambrose says (loc. cit.). But if taken according to the
usage of speech, as applied to manifestation of every kind, it may properly
be applied to spiritual things.
The answer to the objections will sufficiently appear from what has been
said.

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 67, A 2, REP 3 350b-351a
Article 2. Whether Light is a Body?
We proceed thus to the Second Article: It would seem that light is a body.
Objection 1. For Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. iii, 5)201 that “light takes the first
place among bodies.” Therefore light is a body.
Obj. 2. Further, the Philosopher says 202 that light is a species of fire. But fire
is a body, and therefore so is light.
Obj. 3. Further, to be borne, to be divided, to be reflected, is proper to
bodies; and all these are attributed to light and its rays. Moreover, different
rays of light, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom.),203 are united and separated,
which seems impossible unless they are bodies. Therefore light is a body.
On the contrary, Two bodies cannot occupy the same place simultaneously.
But this is the case with light and air. Therefore light is not a body.


200
    Prol. (PL 16, 584).
201
    PL 32, 1279.
202
    Topics, V, 5 (134b29).
203
    II, 4 (PG 3, 641).
I answer that, Light cannot be a body, which appears in three ways. First, on
the part of place. For the place of any one body is different from that of any
other, nor is it possible, naturally speaking, for any two bodies, of whatever
nature, to exist simultaneously in the same place, since contiguity requires
distinction of place.
The second reason is from the nature of movement. For if light were a body,
illumination would be the local motion of a body. Now no local motion of a
body can be instantaneous, as everything that moves from one place to
another must pass through the intervening space before reaching the end,
whereas illumination is instantaneous. Nor can it be argued that the time
required is too short to be perceived; for though this may be the case in
short distances, it cannot be so in distances so great as that which
separates the East from the West. Yet as soon as the sun is at the horizon,
the whole hemisphere is illuminated from end to end. It must also be borne
in mind on the part of movement that whereas all bodies have their natural
determinate movement, that of light is indifferent as regards direction,
working equally in a circle as in a straight line. Hence it appears that the
diffusion of light is not the local motion of a body.
The third reason is from generation and corruption. For if light were a body,
it would follow that whenever the air is darkened by the absence of the
luminary, the body of light would be corrupted, and its matter would receive
a new form. But unless we are to say that darkness is a body, this does not
appear to be the case. Neither does it appear from what matter a body can
be daily generated large enough to fill the intervening hemisphere. Also it
would be absurd to say that a body of so great bulk is corrupted by the
mere absence of the luminary. And should anyone reply that it is not
corrupted, but approaches and moves round with the sun, we may ask why
it is that when a lighted candle is obscured by the intervening object the
whole room is darkened? It is not that the light is condensed round the
candle when this is done, since it burns no more brightly then than it
burned before.
Since, therefore, these things go against not only reason, but also the sense,
we must conclude that light cannot be a body.
Reply Obj. 1. Augustine takes light to be a luminous body in act—in other
words, to be fire, the noblest of the four elements.
Reply Obj. 2. Aristotle refers to light as fire existing in its proper matter; just
as fire in aerial matter is called flame, or in earthly matter is called coal.
Nor must too much attention be paid to the instances brought in by
Aristotle in his works on logic, as he mentions them as probable opinions of
other writers.
Reply Obj. 3. All these properties are assigned to light metaphorically, and
might in the same way be attributed to heat. For because “motion from
place to place is naturally the first of movements,” as is proved in the
Physics,204 we use terms belonging to local motion in speaking of alteration
and movement of all kinds. For even the word distance is extended from
the idea of place, to that of all contraries, as is said in the Metaphysics.205

AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 68, A 4, ANS 358b-359b
Article 4. Whether There Is Only One Heaven?
We proceed thus to the Fourth Article: It would seem that there is only one
heaven.
Objection 1. For the heaven is contrasted with the earth, in the words, In the
beginning God created heaven and earth. But there is only one earth.
Therefore there is only one heaven.
Obj. 2. Further, that which consists of the entire sum of its own matter,
must be one; and such is the heaven, as the Philosopher proves. 206
Therefore there is but one heaven.
Obj. 3. Further, whatever is predicated of many things univocally is
predicated of them according to some common notion. But if there are
more heavens than one, they are so called univocally, for if equivocally only,
they could not properly be called many. If, then, they are many, there must
be some common motion by reason of which each is called heaven, but this
common notion cannot be assigned. Therefore there cannot be more than
one heaven.
On the contrary, It is said (Ps. 148. 4): Praise Him, ye heavens of heavens.
I answer that, On this point there seems to be a diversity of opinion
between Basil and Chrysostom. The latter says that there is only one heaven
(Hom. iv in Gen.),207 and that the words heavens of heavens are merely the
translation of the Hebrew idiom according to which the word is always used
in the plural, just as in Latin there are many nouns that are wanting in the
singular. On the other hand, Basil (Hom. iii in Hexaëm.),208 whom Damascene
follows (De Fid. Orth. ii),209 says that there are many heavens. The difference,
however, is more nominal than real. For Chrysostom means by the one
heaven the whole body that is above the earth and the water, for which
reason the birds that fly in the air are called birds of heaven. But since in
this body there are many distinct parts, Basil said that there are more
heavens than one.
In order, then, to understand the distinction of heavens, it must be borne in
mind that Scripture speaks of heaven in a threefold sense. Sometimes it
uses the word in its proper and natural meaning, when it denotes that body
on high which is luminous actually or potentially, and incorruptible by
204
    Aristotle, VIII, 7 (260 a28).
205
    Aristotle, X, 4 (1055a9).
206
    Heavens, 1, 9 (279a7).
207
    PG 53, 41.
208
    PG 29, 56.
209
    Chap. 6 (PG 94, 880, 884).
nature. In this body there are three heavens; the first is the empyrean,
which is wholly luminous 210; the second is the aqueous or crystalline, wholly
transparent; and the third is called the starry heaven, in part transparent,
and in part actually luminous, and divided into eight spheres. One of these
is the sphere of the fixed stars; the other seven, which may be called the
eight heavens, are the spheres of the planets.
In the second place, the name heaven is applied to a body that participates
in any property of the heavenly body, as sublimity and luminosity, actual or
potential. Thus Damascene (ibid.) holds as one heaven all the space
between the waters and the moon’s orb, calling it the aerial. According to
him, then, there are three heavens, the aerial, the starry, and one higher
than both these, of which the Apostle is understood to speak when he says
of himself that he was rapt to the third heaven (2 Cor. 12. 2).
But since this space contains two elements, namely, fire and air, and in
each of these there is what is called a higher and a lower region, Rabanus
subdivides this space into four distinct heavens. 211 The higher region of fire
he calls “the fiery heaven”; the lower, “the Olympian heaven” from a lofty
mountain of that name; the higher region of air he calls, from its brightness,
“the ethereal heaven,” the lower, the “aerial.” When, therefore, these four
heavens are added to the three enumerated above, there are seven
corporeal heavens in all, in the opinion of Rabanus.
Thirdly, there are metaphorical uses of the word heaven, as when this name
is applied to the Blessed Trinity, Who is the Light and the Most High Spirit.
It is explained by some, as thus applied, in the words, I will ascend into
heaven, whereby the evil spirit is represented as seeking to make himself
equal with God. Sometimes also spiritual goods, the recompense of the
Saints, from being the highest of all good gifts, are signified by the word
heaven, and, in fact, are so signified, according to Augustine (De Serm. Dom.
in Monte),212 in the words, Your reward is very great in heaven (Matt. 5. 12).
Again, three kinds of supernatural visions, bodily, imaginative, and
intellectual, are called sometimes so many heavens, in reference to which
Augustine (De Gen. ad lit. xii)213 expounds Paul’s rapture to the third heaven.
Reply Obj. 1. The earth stands in relation to the heaven as the centre of a
circle to its circumference. But as one centre may have many
circumferences, so, though there is but one earth, there may be many
heavens.

210
    This and the following names are found in Glossa ordin., on Gen. 1. 1 (1, 23F); Bede, In
Pentat., Bk. I, on Gen. 1. 1 (PL 91, 192); on the names, disposition and number of the
heavens, see Alexander of Hales, Summa Theol., I-II, n. 266 (QR II, 327); Albert, In Sent., II, d.
XV, A. 3 (BO XXVII, 275); Summa de Creatur., Pt. I, tr. 3, Q. 10 (BO XXXIV, 415); Bonaventure, In
Sent., II, d. ii, dub. 2 (QR II, 85). Cf. Denifle, Chartularium, n. 128 (I, 171).
211
    Bede, In Pentat., on Gen. 1. 1 (PL 91, 192).
212
    I, 5 (PL 34, 1237).
213
    Chap. 28, 29, 34 (PL 34, 478, 479, 482).
Reply Obj. 2. The argument holds good as to the heaven, in so far as it
denotes the entire sum of corporeal creation, for in that sense it is one.
Reply Obj. 3. All the heavens have in common sublimity and some degree of
luminosity, as appears from what has been said.


20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-II, Q 1OO, A 2, REP 2
252b-253a; PART III, Q 8, A 1, REP 2 756d-757c
Summa Theologica, PART I-II, Q 1OO, A 2, REP 2 252b-253a
Article 2. Whether the Moral Precepts of the Law Are About All the Acts
of Virtue?
We proceed thus to the Second Article: It would seem that the moral
precepts of the Law are not about all the acts of virtue.
Objection 1. For observance of the precepts of the Old Law is called
justification, according to Ps. 118. 8: I will keep Thy justifications. But
justification is the execution of justice. Therefore the moral precepts are
not only about acts of justice.
Obj. 2. Further, that which comes under a precept has the character of a
duty. But the character of duty belongs to justice alone and to none of the
other virtues, for the proper act of justice consists in rendering to each one
his due. Therefore the precepts of the moral law are not about the acts of
the other virtues, but only about the acts of justice.
Obj. 3. Further, every law is made for the common good, as Isidore says
(Etym. V, 21).214 But of all the virtues justice alone regards the common good,
as the Philosopher says. 215 Therefore the moral precepts are only about the
acts of justice.
On the contrary, Ambrose says (De Paradiso viii)216 that “a sin is a
transgression of the Divine law, and a disobedience to the commandments
of heaven.” But there are sins contrary to all the acts of virtue. Therefore it
belongs to the Divine law to direct all the acts of virtue.
I answer that, Since the precepts of the Law are ordered to the common
good, as stated above (Q. XC, A. 2), the precepts of the Law must be
diversified according to the various kinds of community; hence the
Philosopher teaches 217 that the laws which are made in a state which is
ruled by a king must be different from the laws of a state which is ruled by
the people, or by a few powerful men in the state. Now human law is
ordained for one kind of community, and the Divine law for another kind.
Because human law is ordained for the civil community, implying mutual
duties of man and his fellows, and men are ordered to one another by

214
    PL 82, 203; 11, 10 (PL 82, 131).
215
    Ethics, V, I (1130a4).
216
    PL 14, 309.
217
    Politics, IV, I (1289a11).
outward acts, by which men live in communion with one another. This life in
common of man with man pertains to justice, whose proper function
consists in directing the human community. Therefore human law makes
precepts only about acts of justice; and if it commands acts of other
virtues, this is only in so far as they assume the nature of justice, as the
Philosopher explains.218
But the community for which the Divine law is ordained is that of men in
relation to God, either in this life or in the life to come. And therefore the
Divine law proposes precepts about all those matters by which men are
well ordered in their relations to God. Now man is united to God by his
reason or mind, in which is God's image. Therefore the Divine law proposes
precepts about all those matters by which human reason is well ordered.
But this is effected by the acts of all the virtues, since the intellectual
virtues set in good order the acts of the reason in themselves, while the
moral virtues set in good order the acts of the reason in reference to the
interior passions and exterior actions. It is therefore evident that the Divine
law fittingly proposes precepts about the acts of all the virtues, yet so that
certain matters, without which the order of virtue, which is the order of
reason, cannot even exist, come under an obligation of precept, while other
matters, which pertain to the well-being of perfect virtue, come under an
admonition of counsel.
Reply Obj. 1. The fulfillment of the commandments of the Law, even of
those which are about the acts of the other virtues, has the character of
justification, since it is just that man should obey God; or again, because it
is just that all that belongs to man should be subject to reason.
Reply Obj. 2. Justice properly so called regards the duty of one man to
another; but all the other virtues regard the duty of the lower powers to
reason. It is in relation to this latter duty that the Philosopher speaks of a
kind of metaphorical justice. 219
The Reply to the Third Objection is clear from what has been said about the
different kinds of community.

Summa Theologica, PART III, Q 8, A 1, REP 2 756d-757c
Article 1. Whether Christ Is the Head of the Church?
We proceed thus to the First Article: It would seem that it does not belong
to Christ as man to be Head of the Church.
Objection 1. For the head imparts sense and motion to the members. Now
spiritual sense and motion which are by grace, and not imparted to us by
the Man Christ, because, as Augustine says (De Trin. XV, 26),220 not even


218
    Ethics, V, I (1129b23).
219
    Ethics, V, II (1138b5).
220
    PL 42, 1093.
Christ, as man, but only as God, bestows the Holy Ghost. Therefore it does
not belong to Him as man to be Head of the Church.
Obj. 2. Further, it is not fitting for the head to have a head. But God is the
Head of Christ, as man, according to I Cor. 11. 3, The Head of Christ is God.
Therefore Christ Himself is not a head.
Obj. 3. Furthermore, the head of a man is a particular member, receiving an
influx from the heart. But Christ is the universal principle of the whole
Church. Therefore He is not the Head of the Church.
On the contrary, It is written (Eph. 1. 22): And He . . . hath made Him head
over all the Church.
I answer that, As the whole Church is termed one mystic body from its
likeness to the natural body of a man, which in various members has
various acts, as the Apostle teaches (Rom. 12. 4; Cor. 12. 12), so likewise
Christ is called the Head of the Church from a likeness with the human
head, in which we may consider three things, namely, order, perfection, and
power. Order, because the head is the first part of man, beginning from the
higher part; and hence it is that every principle is usually called a head
according to Ezech. 16. 24: At every head of the way, thou hast set up a sign
of thy prostitution. Perfection, because in the head dwell all the senses,
both interior and exterior, whereas in the other members there is only
touch, and hence it is said (Isa. 9. 15): The aged and honorable, he is the
head. Power, because the power and movement of the other members,
together with the direction of them in their acts, is from the head, by
reason of the sensitive and motive power there ruling; hence the ruler is
called the head of a people, according to I Kings 15. 17: When thou wast a
little one in thy own eyes, wast thou not made the head of the tribes of
Israel?
Now these three things belong spiritually to Christ.
First, on account of His nearness to God His grace is the highest and first,
though not in time, since all have received grace on account of His grace,
according to Rom. 8. 29: For whom He foreknew, He also predestinated to be
made conformable to the image of His Son; that He might be the first-born
amongst many brethren. Secondly, He had perfection as regards the fulness
of all graces, according to John 1. 14, We saw Him (Vulg., His glory) . . . full of
grace and truth, as was shown, Q. VII, A. 9. Thirdly, He has the power of
bestowing grace on all the members of the Church, according to John 1. 16:
Of His fulness we have all received . And thus it is plain that Christ is fittingly
called the Head of the Church.
Reply Obj. 1. To give grace or the Holy Ghost belongs to Christ as He is God,
as originator; but instrumentally it belongs also to Him as man, since His
manhood is the instrument of His Godhead. And hence by the power of the
Godhead His actions were health-bringing to us—that is, by causing grace in
us, both meritoriously and efficiently. But Augustine denies that Christ as
man gives the Holy Ghost as originator. Even other saints are said to give
the Holy Ghost instrumentally, or ministerially, according to Gal 3. 5: He . . .
who giveth to you the Spirit, etc.
Reply Obj. 2. In metaphorical speech we must not expect a likeness in all
respects, for thus there would be not likeness but identity. Accordingly a
natural head has not another head because one human body is not part of
another; but a metaphorical body—that is, an ordered multitude—is part of
another multitude as the domestic multitude is part of the civil multitude;
and hence the father who is head of the domestic multitude has a head
above him—that is, the civil governor. And so there is no reason why God
should not be the head of Christ, although Christ Himself is Head of the
Church.
Reply Obj. 3. The head has a manifest preeminence over the other exterior
members, but the heart has a certain hidden influence. And hence the Holy
Ghost is likened to the heart, since He invisibly quickens and unifies the
Church; but Christ is likened to the Head in His visible nature in which man
is set over man.


23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART I, 55b; 59d; 61c; PART III, 176d-177d;
181d; 193d-195d
Leviathan, PART I, 55b
To these uses, there are also four correspondent abuses. First, when men
register their thoughts wrong by the inconstancy of the signification of their
words; by which they register for their conceptions that which they never
conceived, and so deceive themselves. Secondly, when they use words
metaphorically; that is, in other sense than that they are ordained for, and
thereby deceive others. Thirdly, when by words they declare that to be their
will which is not. Fourthly, when they use them to grieve one another: for
seeing nature hath armed living creatures, some with teeth, some with
horns, and some with hands, to grieve an enemy, it is but an abuse of
speech to grieve him with the tongue, unless it be one whom we are
obliged to govern; and then it is not to grieve, but to correct and amend.
The manner how speech serveth to the remembrance of the consequence
of causes and effects consisteth in the imposing of names, and the
connexion of them.

Leviathan, PART I, 59d
2. The second cause of absurd assertions, I ascribe to the giving of names
of bodies to accidents; or of accidents to bodies; as they do that say, faith
is infused, or inspired; when nothing can be poured, or breathed into
anything, but body; and that extension is body; that phantasms are spirits,
etc.
3. The third I ascribe to the giving of the names of the accidents of bodies
without us to the accidents of our own bodies; as they do that say, the
colour is in the body; the sound is in the air, etc.
4. The fourth, to the giving of the names of bodies to names, or speeches;
as they do that say that there be things universal; that a living creature is
genus, or a general thing, etc.
5. The fifth, to the giving of the names of accidents to names and speeches;
as they do that say, the nature of a thing is its definition; a man’s command
is his will; and the like.
6. The sixth, to the use of metaphors, tropes, and other rhetorical figures,
instead of words proper. For though it be lawful to say, for example, in
common speech, the way goeth, of leadeth hither, or thither; the proverb
says this or that (whereas ways cannot go, nor proverbs speak); yet in
reckoning, and seeking of truth, such speeches are not to be admitted.

Leviathan, PART I, 61c
So also do the Greek words for the same, which are ὁρμὴ and ἀφορμὴ. For
Nature itself does often press upon men those truths which afterwards,
when they look for somewhat beyond Nature, they stumble at. For the
Schools find in mere appetite to go, or move, no actual motion at all; but
because some motion they must acknowledge, they call it metaphorical
motion, which is but an absurd speech; for though words may be called
metaphorical, bodies and motions cannot.
That which men desire they are also said to love, and to hate those things
for which they have aversion. So that desire and love are the same thing;
save that by desire, we always signify the absence of the object; by love,
most commonly the presence of the same. So also by aversion, we signify
the absence; and by hate, the presence of the object.
Of appetites and aversions, some are born with men; as appetite of food,
appetite of excretion, and exoneration (which may also and more properly
be called aversions, from somewhat they feel in their bodies), and some
other appetites, not many. The rest, which are appetites of particular things,
proceed from experience and trial of their effects upon themselves or other
men. For of things we know not at all, or believe not to be, we can have no
further desire than to taste and try. But aversion we have for things, not
only which we know have hurt us, but also that we do not know whether
they will hurt us, or not.

Leviathan, PART III, 176d-177d
On the signification of the word spirit dependeth that of the word
inspiration; which must either be taken properly, and then it is nothing but
the blowing into a man some thin and subtle air or wind in such manner as
a man filleth a bladder with his breath; or if spirits be not corporeal, but
have their existence only in the fancy, it is nothing but the blowing in of a
phantasm; which is improper to say, and impossible; for phantasms are not,
but only seem to be, somewhat. That word therefore is used in the
Scripture metaphorically only: as where it is said that God inspired into man
the breath of life, 221 no more is meant than that God gave unto him vital
motion. For we are not to think that God made first a living breath, and then
blew it into Adam after he was made, whether that breath were real or
seeming; but only as it is “that he gave him life, and breath”;222 that is, made
him a living creature. And where it is said “all Scripture is given by
inspiration from God,” 223 speaking there of the Scripture of the Old
Testament, it is an easy metaphor to signify that God inclined the spirit or
mind of those writers to write that which should be useful in teaching,
reproving, correcting, and instructing men in the way of righteous living. But
where St. Peter saith that “Prophecy came not in old time by the will of
man, but the holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit,”
224
    by the Holy Spirit is meant the voice of God in a dream or vision
supernatural, which is not inspiration: nor when our Saviour, breathing on
His Disciples, said, “Receive the Holy Spirit, was that breath the Spirit, but a
sign of the spiritual graces he gave unto them. And though it be said of
many, and of our Saviour Himself, that he was full of the Holy Spirit; yet
that fullness is not to be understood for infusion of the substance of God,
but for accumulation of his gifts, such as are the gift of sanctity of life, of
tongues, and the like, whether attained supernaturally or by study and
industry; for in all cases they are the gifts of God. So likewise where God
says, “I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your
daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall dream dreams, and your young
men shall see visions,” 225 we are not to understand it in the proper sense,
as if his Spirit were like water, subject to effusion or infusion; but as if God
had promised to give them prophetical dreams and visions. For the proper
use of the word infused, in speaking of the graces of God, is an abuse of it;
for those graces are virtues, not bodies to be carried hither and thither, and
to be poured into men as into barrels.
In the same manner, to take inspiration in the proper sense, or to say that
good spirits entered into men to make them prophesy, or evil spirits into
those that became phrenetic, lunatic, or epileptic, is not to take the word in
the sense of the Scripture; for the Spirit there is taken for the power of
God, working by causes to us unknown. As also the wind that is there said
to fill the house wherein the Apostles were assembled on the day of

221
    Genesis, 2. 7.
222
    Acts, 17. 25.
223
    II Timothy, 3. 16.
224
    II Peter, 1. 21.
225
    Joel, 2. 28.
Pentecost226 is not to be understood for the Holy Spirit, which is the Deity
itself; but for an external sign of God’s special working on their hearts to
effect in them the internal graces and holy virtues He thought requisite for
the performance of their apostleship.
                              CHAPTER XXXV
Of the Signification in Scripture of Kingdom of God, of Holy, Sacred,
and Sacrament
The kingdom of God in the writings of divines, and specially in sermons and
treatises of devotion, is taken most commonly for eternal felicity, after this
life, in the highest heaven, which they also call the kingdom of glory; and
sometimes for the earnest of that felicity, sanctification, which they term
the kingdom of grace; but never for the monarchy, that is to say, the
sovereign power of God over any subjects acquired by their own consent,
which is the proper signification of kingdom.
To the contrary, I find the kingdom of God to signify in most places of
Scripture a kingdom properly so named, constituted by the votes of the
people of Israel in peculiar manner, wherein they chose God for their king
by covenant made with Him, upon God’s promising them the possession of
the land of Canaan; and but seldom metaphorically; and then it is taken for
dominion over sin (and only in the New Testament), because such a
dominion as that every subject shall have in the kingdom of God, and
without prejudice to the sovereign.
From the very creation, God not only reigned over all men naturally by His
might, but also had peculiar subjects, whom He commanded by a voice, as
one man speaketh to another. In which manner He reigned over Adam and
gave him commandment to abstain from the tree of cognizance of good and
evil; which when he obeyed not, but tasting thereof took upon him to be as
God, judging between good and evil, not by his Creator’s commandment, but
by his own sense, his punishment was a privation of the estate of eternal
life, wherein God had at first created him: and afterwards God punished his
posterity for their vices, all but eight persons, with a universal deluge; and
in these eight did consist the then kingdom of God.

Leviathan, PART III, 181d
The word of God, as it is taken for that which He hath spoken, is understood
sometimes properly, sometimes metaphorically. Properly, as the words He
hath spoken to His prophets: metaphorically, for His wisdom, power, and
eternal decree, in making the world; in which sense, those fiats, “Let their
be light, Let there be a firmament, Let us make man,” etc. 227 are the word of
God. And in the same sense it is said, “All things were made by it, and

226
      Acts, 2. 2.
227
      Genesis, I.
without it was nothing made that was made”: 228 and “He upholdeth all
things by the word of His power”; 229 that is, by the power of His word; that
is, by His power: and “The worlds were framed by the word of God”; 230 and
many other places to the same sense: as also amongst the Latins, the
name of fate, which signifieth properly the word spoken, is taken in the
same sense.

Leviathan, PART III, 193d-195d
As the kingdom of God, and eternal life, so also God’s enemies, and their
torments after judgement, appear by the Scripture to have their place on
earth. The name of the place where all men remain till the resurrection,
that were either buried or swallowed up of the earth, is usually called in
Scripture by words that signify under ground; which the Latins read
generally infernus and inferi, and the Greeks ἅδησ; that is to say, a place
where men cannot see; and containeth as well the grave as any other
deeper place. But for the place of the damned after the resurrection, it is
not determined, neither in the Old nor New Testament, by any note of
situation, but only by the company: as that it shall be where such wicked
men were, as God in former times in extraordinary and miraculous manner
had destroyed from off the face of the earth: as, for example, that they are
in Inferno, in Tartarus, or in the bottomless pit; because Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram were swallowed up alive into the earth. Not that the writers of the
Scripture would have us believe there could be in the globe of the earth,
which is not only finite, but also, compared to the height of the stars, of no
considerable magnitude, a pit without a bottom; that is, a hole of infinite
depth, such as the Greeks in their demonology (that is to say, in their
doctrine concerning demons), and after them the Romans, called Tartarus;
of which Virgil says,
Bis patet in prœceps, tantum tendítque sub umbras,
Quantus ad œthereum cœli suspectus Olympum:
for that is a thing the proportion of earth to heaven cannot bear: but that
we should believe them there, indefinitely, where those men are, on whom
God inflicted that exemplary punishment.
Again, because those mighty men of the earth that lived in the time of
Noah, before the flood (which the Greeks called heroes, and the Scripture
giants, and both say were begotten by copulation of the children of God
with the children of men), were for their wicked life destroyed by the
general deluge, the place of the damned is therefore also sometimes
marked out by the company of those deceased giants; as Proverbs, 21. 16,
“The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall remain in

228
    John, 1. 3.
229
    Hebrews, 1. 3.
230
    Ibid., 11. 3.
the congregation of the giants,” and Job, 26. 5, “Behold the giants groan
under water, and they that dwell with them.” Here the place of the damned
is under the water. And Isaiah, 14. 9, “Hell is troubled how to meet thee”
(that is, the King of Babylon) “and will displace the giants for thee”: and
here again the place of the damned, if the sense be literal, is to be under
water.
Thirdly, because the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, by the extraordinary
wrath of God, were consumed for their wickedness with fire and brimstone,
and together with them the country about made a stinking bituminous lake,
the place of the damned is sometimes expressed by fire, and a fiery lake: as
in the Apocalypse, 21. 8, “But the timorous, incredulous, and abominable,
and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all
liars, shall have their part in the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone;
which is the second death.” So that it is manifest that hell fire, which is
here expressed by metaphor, from the real fire of Sodom, signifieth not any
certain kind or place of torment, but is to be taken indefinitely for
destruction, as it is in Revelation, 20, at the fourteenth verse, where it is
said that “Death and hell were cast into the lake of fire”; that is to say, were
abolished and destroyed; as if after the day of judgement there shall be no
more dying, nor no more going into hell; that is, no more going to Hades
(from which word perhaps our word hell is derived), which is the same with
no more dying.
Fourthly, from the plague of darkness inflicted on the Egyptians, of which it
is written, “They saw not one another, neither rose any man from his place
for three days; but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings”; 231
the place of the wicked after judgement is called utter darkness, or, as it is
in the original, darkness without. And so it is expressed where the king
commandeth his servants, "to bind hand and foot the man that had not on
his wedding garment and to cast him into,” εἰς τὸ σκότος τὸ ἐξώτερον,
“external darkness,” 232 or “darkness without”: which, though translated
“utter darkness,” does not signify how great, but where that darkness is to
be; namely, without the habitation of God’s elect.
Lastly, whereas there was a place near Jerusalem called the Valley of the
Children of Hinnon, in a part whereof called Tophet the Jews had committed
most grievous idolatry, sacrificing their children to the idol Moloch; and
wherein also God had afflicted His enemies with most grievous
punishments; and wherein Josiah had burnt the priests of Moloch upon
their own altars, as appeareth at large in II Kings, Chapter 23; the place
served afterwards to receive the filth and garbage which was carried thither
out of the city; and there used to be fires made, from time to time, to
purify the air and take away the stench of carrion. From this abominable
231
      Exodus, 10. 23.
232
      Matthew, 22. 13.
place, the Jews used ever after to call the place of the damned by the
name of Gehenna, or Valley of Hinnon. And this Gehenna is that word which
is usually now translated hell; and from the fires from time to time there
burning, we have the notion of everlasting and unquenchable fire.
Seeing now there is none that so interprets the Scripture as that after the
day of judgement the wicked are all eternally to be punished in the Valley of
Hinnon; or that they shall so rise again as to be ever after underground or
underwater; or that after the resurrection they shall no more see one
another, nor stir from one place to another; it followeth, methinks, very
necessarily, that that which is thus said concerning hell fire is spoken
metaphorically; and that therefore there is a proper sense to be enquired
after (for of all metaphors there is some real ground, that may be expressed
in proper words), both of the place of hell, and the nature of hellish
torments and tormenters.
And first for the tormenters, we have their nature and properties exactly
and properly delivered by the names of the enemy, or Satan; the Accuser, or
Diabolus; the Destroyer, or Abaddon. Which significant names, Satan, Devil,
Abaddon, set not forth to us any individual person, as proper names use to
do, but only an office or quality; and are therefore appellatives; which ought
not to have been left untranslated, as they are in the Latin and modern
Bibles, because thereby they seem to be the proper names of demons; and
men are the more easily seduced to believe the doctrine of devils, which at
that time was the religion of the Gentiles, and contrary to that of Moses
and of Christ.
And because by the Enemy, the Accuser, and Destroyer is meant the enemy
of them that shall be in the kingdom of God; therefore if the kingdom of
God after the resurrection be upon the earth (as in the former chapter I
have shown by Scripture it seems to be), the enemy and his kingdom must
be on earth also. For so also was it in the time before the Jews had
deposed God. For God’s kingdom was in Palestine; and the nations round
about were the kingdoms of the Enemy; and consequently by Satan is
meant any earthly enemy of the Church.
The torments of hell are expressed sometimes by “weeping, and gnashing of
teeth,” as Matthew, 8. 12; sometimes, by “the worm of conscience,” as
Isaiah, 66. 24, and Mark, 9. 44, 46, 48; sometimes, by fire, as in the place
now quoted, “where the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched,” and
many places besides: sometimes, by “shame, and contempt,” as, “And many
of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake; some to everlasting
life; and some to shame, and everlasting contempt.” 233 All which places
design metaphorically a grief and discontent of mind from the sight of that
eternal felicity in others which they themselves through their own

233
      Daniel, 12. 2.
incredulity and disobedience have lost. And because such felicity in others
is not sensible but by comparison with their own actual miseries, it
followeth that they are to suffer such bodily pains and calamities as are
incident to those who not only live under evil and cruel governors, but have
also for enemy the eternal king of the saints, God Almighty. And amongst
these bodily pains is to be reckoned also to every one of the wicked a
second death. For though the Scripture be clear for a universal resurrection,
yet we do not read that to any of the reprobate is promised an eternal life.
For whereas St. Paul, to the question concerning what bodies men shall rise
with again, saith that “the body is sown in corruption, and is raised in
incorruption; it is sown in dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power”;234 glory and power cannot be applied to the
bodies of the wicked: nor can the name of second death be applied to
those that can never die but once. And although in metaphorical speech a
calamitous life everlasting may be called an everlasting death, yet it cannot
well be understood of a second death. The fire prepared for the wicked is
an everlasting fire: that is to say, the estate wherein no man can be without
torture, both of body and mind, after the resurrection, shall endure for ever;
and in that sense the fire shall be unquenchable, and the torments
everlasting: but it cannot thence be inferred that he who shall be cast into
that fire, or be tormented with those torments, shall endure and resist
them so as to be eternally burnt and tortured, and yet never be destroyed
nor die. And though there be many places that affirm everlasting fire and
torments, into which men may be cast successively one after another for
ever, yet I find none that affirm there shall be an eternal life therein of any
individual person; but to the contrary, an everlasting death, which is the
second death: “For after death and the grave shall have delivered up the
dead which were in them, and every man be judged according to his works;
death and the grave shall also be cast into the lake of fire. This is the
second death.” 235 Whereby it is evident that there is to be a second death of
every one that shall be condemned at the day of judgement, after which he
shall die no more.
The joys of life eternal are in Scripture comprehended all under the name of
salvation, or being saved. To be saved is to be secured, either respectively,
against special evils, or absolutely, against all evil, comprehending want,
sickness, and death itself. And because man was created in a condition
immortal, not subject to corruption, and consequently to nothing that
tendeth to the dissolution of his nature; and fell from that happiness by the
sin of Adam; it followeth that to be saved from sin is to be saved from all
the evil and calamities that sin hath brought upon us.


234
      I Corinthians, 15. 42, 43.
235
      Revelation, 20. 13, 14.
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 422c-423c
What Virgil says of Venus and Vulcan, Lucretius had better expressed of a
stolen enjoyment betwixt her and Mars:
                           Belli fera mœmera Mavors
       Armipotens regit, in gremium qui sæpe tuum se
       Rejicit, æterno devinctus vulnere amoris:
                                     . . . .
       Pascit amore avidos inhians in te, Dea, visus,
       Eque tuo pendet resupini spiritus ore:
       Hunc tu, Diva, tuo recubantem corpore sancto
       Circumfusa super, suaveis ex ore loquelas
       Funde.236
When I consider this rejicit, pascit, inhians, molli, fovet, medullas, labefacta,
pendet, percurrit, and that noble circumfusa, mother of the gentle infusus; I
contemn those little quibbles and verbal allusions that have been since in
use. Those worthy people stood in need of no subtilty to disguise their
meaning; their language is downright, and full of natural and continued
vigour; they are all epigram; not only the tail, but the head, body, and feet.
There is nothing forced, nothing languishing, but everything keeps the same
pace: Contextus totus virilis est; non sunt circa flosculos occupati.237 ’Tis not
a soft eloquence, and without offence only; ’tis nervous and solid, that does
not so much please, as it fills and ravishes the greatest minds. When I see
these brave forms of expression, so lively, so profound, I do not say that ’tis
Well said, but Well thought. ’ Tis the sprightliness of the imagination that
swells and elevates the words: Pectus est quod disertum facit.238 Our people
call language, judgment, and fine words, full conceptions. This painting is
not so much carried on by dexterity of hand, as by having the object more
vividly imprinted in the soul. Gallus speaks simply, because he conceives
simply: Horace does not content himself with a superficial expression; that
would betray him; he sees farther and more clearly into things; his mind
breaks into and rummages all the magazine of words and figures wherewith
to express himself, and he must have them more than ordinary, because his
conception is so. Plutarch says,239 that he sees the Latin tongue by the
things: ’tis here the same: the sense illuminates and produces the words,
no more words of air, but of flesh and bone; they signifie more than they
say. Moreover, those who are not well skilled in a language, present some
236
    Mars, the god of wars, who controls the cruel tasks of war, often reclines on thy bosom,
and greedily drinks love at both his eyes, vanquished by the eternal wound of love: and his
breath, as he reclines, hangs on thy lips; bending thy head over him as he lies upon thy
sacred person, pour forth sweet and persuasive words.—Lucretius, i. 23.
237
    The whole contexture is manly; they don’t occupy themselves with little flowers of
rhetoric.—Seneca, Epist., 33.
238
    The heart makes the eloquene.—Quintilian, x.
239
    Demosthenes.
image of this; for in Italy , I said whatever I had a mind to in common
discourse, but in more serious talk, I durst not have trusted myself with an
idiom that I could not wind and turn out of its ordinary pace; I would have a
power of introducing something of my own.
The handling and utterance of fine wits is that which sets off language; not
so much by innovating it, as by putting it to more vigorous and various
services, and by straining, bending, and adapting it to them. They do not
create words, but they enrich their own, and give them weight and
signification by the uses they put them to, and teach them unwonted
motions, but withal, ingeniously and discreetly. And how little this talent is
given to all, is manifest by the many French scribblers of this age: they are
bold and proud enough not to follow the common road, but want of
Invention and discretion ruins them; there is nothing seen in their writings
but a wretched affectation of a strange new style, with cold and absurd
disguises, which, instead of elevating, depress the matter: provided they can
but trick themselves out with new words, they care not what they signify;
and to bring in a new word by the head and shoulders, they leave the old
one, very often more sinewy and significant than the other.
There is stuff enough in our language, but there is a defect in cutting out:
for there is nothing that might not be made out of our terms of hunting and
war, which is a fruitful soil to borrow from; forms of speaking, like herbs,
improve and grow stronger by being transplanted. I find it sufficiently
abundant, but not sufficiently pliable and vigorous: it commonly quails
under a powerful conception; if you would maintain the dignity of your
style, you will often perceive it to flag and languish under you, and there
Latin steps in to its relief, as Greek does to others. Of some of these words
I have just picked out we do not so easily discern the energy, by reason that
the frequent use of them has in some sort abased their beauty, and
rendered it common; as in our ordinary language there are many excellent
phrases and metaphors to be met with, of which the beauty is withered by
age, and the colour is sullied by too common handling; but that nothing
lessens the relish to an understanding man, nor does it derogate from the
glory of those ancient authors who, ’tis likely, first brought those words into
that lustre.
The sciences treat of things too refinedly, after an artificial, very different
from the common and natural, way. My page makes love, and understands
it; but read to him Leo Hebræus and Ficinus, where they speak of love, its
thoughts and actions, he understands it not. I do not find in Aristotle most
of my ordinary motions; they are there covered and disguised in another
robe for the use of the schools. Well may they speed! but were I of the
trade, I would as much naturalise art as they artify nature. Let us let Bembo
and Equicola alone.
28 HARVEY: Motion of the Heart, 267a-b
             To the Most Illustrious and Indomitable Prince,
                                CHARLES,
                KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND,
                            DEFENDER OF THE FAITH
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE!
The heart of animals is the foundation of their life, the sovereign of
everything within them, the sun of their microcosm, that upon which all
growth depends, from which all power proceeds. The King, in like manner, is
the foundation of his kingdom, the sun of the world around him, the heart
of the republic, the fountain whence all power, all grace doth flow. What I
have here written of the motions of the heart I am the more emboldened to
present to your Majesty, according to the custom of the present age,
because almost all things human are done after human examples, and
many things in a King are after the pattern of the heart. The knowledge of
his heart, therefore, will not be useless to a Prince, as embracing a kind of
Divine example of his functions—and it has still been usual with men to
compare small things with great. Here, at all events, best of Princes, placed
as you are on the pinnacle of human affairs, you may at once contemplate
the prime mover in the body of man, and the emblem of your own
sovereign power. Accept therefore, with your wonted clemency, I most
humbly beseech you, illustrious Prince, this, my new Treatise on the Heart;
you, who are yourself the new light of this age, and indeed its very heart; a
Prince abounding in virtue and in grace, and to whom we gladly refer all the
blessing which England enjoys, all the pleasure we have in our lives.
                                          Your Majesty’s most devoted servant,
                                                                WILLIAM HARVEY
[London . . . . 1628.]
      TO HIS VERY DEAR FRIEND, DOCTOR ARGENT, THE EXCELLENT AND
  ACCOMPLISHED PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF PHYSICIANS, AND TO
       OTHER LEARNED PHYSICIANS, HIS MOST ESTEEMED COLLEAGUES
I have already and repeatedly presented you, my learned friends, with my
new views of the motion and function of the heart, in my anatomical
lectures; but having now for nine years and more confirmed these views by
multiplied demonstrations in your presence, illustrated them by arguments,
and freed the from the objections of the most learned and skilful
anatomists, I at length yield to the requests, I might say entreaties, of many,
and here present them for general consideration in this treatise.


30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 65b-c
9. Another diversity of methods is, according to the subject or matter which
is handled. For there is a great difference in delivery of the mathematics,
which are the most abstracted of knowledges, and policy, which is the most
immersed. And howsoever contention hath been moved, touching an
uniformity of method in multiformity of matter, yet we see how that
opinion, besides the weakness of it, hath been of ill desert towards learning,
as that which taketh the way to reduce learning to certain empty and
barren generalities; being but the very husks and shells of sciences, all the
kernel being forced out and expulsed with the torture and press of the
method. And therefore as I did allow well of particular topics for invention,
so I do likewise of particular methods of tradition.
10. Another diversity of judgement in the delivery and teaching of
knowledge, is according unto the light and presuppositions of that which is
delivered. For that knowledge which is new, and foreign from opinions
received, is to be delivered in another form than that that is agreeable and
familiar; and therefore Aristotle, when he thinks to tax Democritus, doth in
truth commend him, where he saith, “If we shall indeed dispute, and not
follow after similitudes,” &c. For those whose conceits are seated in popular
opinions, need only but to prove or dispute; but those whose conceits are
beyond popular opinions, have a double labour; the one to make themselves
conceived, and the other to prove and demonstrate. So that it is of
necessity with them to have recourse to similitudes and translations to
express themselves. And therefore in the infancy of learning, and in rude
times, when those conceits which are now trivial were then new, the world
was full of parables and similitudes; for else would men either have passed
over without mark, or else rejected for paradoxes that which was offered,
before they had understood or judged. So in divine learning, we see how
frequent parables and tropes are: for it is a rule, that whatsoever science is
not consonant to presuppositions, must pray in aid of similitudes.
11. There be also other diversities of methods vulgar and received: as that of
resolution or analysis, of constitution or systasis, of concealment or cryptic,
&c, which I do allow well of, though I have stood upon those which are least
handled and observed. All which I have remembered to this purpose,
because I would erect and constitute one general inquiry (which seems to
me deficient) touching the wisdom of tradition.


35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK III, CH I, SECT 5 252b-c
5. Words ultimately derived from such as signify sensible ideas. It may also
lead us a little towards the original of all our notions and knowledge, if we
remark how great a dependence our words have on common sensible ideas;
and how those which are made use of to stand for actions and notions
quite removed from sense, have their rise from thence, and from obvious
sensible ideas are transferred to more abstruse significations, and made to
stand for ideas that come not under the cognizance of our senses; v.g. to
imagine, apprehend, comprehend, adhere, conceive, instil, disgust,
disturbance, tranquillity, &c., are all words taken from the operations of
sensible things, and applied to certain modes of thinking. Spirit, in its
primary signification, is breath; angel, a messenger: and I doubt not but, if
we could trace them to their sources, we should find, in all languages, the
names which stand for things that fall not under our senses to have had
their first rise from sensible ideas. By which we may give some kind of
guess what kind of notions they were, and whence derived, which filled
their minds who were the first beginners of languages, and how nature,
even in the naming of things, unawares suggested to men the originals and
principles of all their knowledge: whilst, to give names that might make
known to others any operations they felt in themselves, or any other ideas
that came not under their senses, they were fain to borrow words from
ordinary known ideas of sensation, by that means to make others the more
easily to conceive those operations they experimented in themselves, which
made no outward sensible appearances; and then, when they had got
known and agreed names to signify those internal operations of their own
minds, they were sufficiently furnished to make known by words all their
other ideas; since they could consist of nothing but either of outward
sensible perceptions, or of the inward operations of their minds about
them; we having, as has been proved, no ideas at all, but what originally
come either from sensible objects without, or what we feel within
ourselves, from the inward workings of our own spirits, of which we are
conscious to ourselves within.


35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 144 441d
144. But, nothing seems more to have contributed towards engaging men in
controversies and mistakes with regard to the nature and operations of the
mind, than the being used to speak of those things in terms borrowed from
sensible ideas. For example, the will is termed the motion of the soul; this
infuses a belief that the mind of man is as a ball in motion, impelled and
determined by the objects of sense, as necessarily as that is by the stroke
of a racket. Hence arise endless scruples and errors of dangerous
consequence in morality. All which, I doubt not, may be cleared, and truth
appear plain, uniform, and consistent, could but philosophers be prevailed
on to retire into themselves, and attentively consider their own meaning.


36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART III, 114b-115b
Another professor shewed me a large paper of instructions for discovering
plots and conspiracies against the Government. He advised great statesmen
to examine into the diet of all suspected persons; their times of eating;
upon which side they lay in bed; with which hand they wiped their
posteriours; to take a strict view of their excrements, and from the colour,
the odour, the taste, the consistence, the crudeness, or maturity of
digestion, from a judgment of their thoughts and designs: because, men are
never so serious, thoughtful, and intent, as when they are at stool; which
he found by frequent experiment: for in such conjunctures, when he used
merely as a trial to consider which was the best way of murdering the king,
his ordure would have a tincture of green; but quite different when he
thought only of raising an insurrection, or burning the metropolis.
The whole discourse was written with great acuteness, containing many
observations both curious and useful for politicians; but, as I conceived, not
altogether compleat. This I ventured to tell the author, and offered, if he
pleased, to supply him with some additions. He received my proposition
with more compliance than is usual among writers, especially those of the
projecting species, professing he would be glad to receive farther
information.
I told him, that should I happen to live in a kingdom where plots and
conspiracies were either in vogue from the turbulency of the meaner
people, or could be turned to the use and service of the higher rank of
them, I first would take care to cherish and encourage the breed of
discoverers, witnesses, informers, accusers, prosecutors, evidences,
swearers, together with their several subservient and subaltern
instruments; and when I had got a competent number of them of all sorts
and capacities, I would put them under the colour and conduct of some
dextrous persons in sufficient power both to protect and reward them. Men
thus qualified and thus empowered might make a most excellent use and
advantage of plots, they might raise their own characters and pass for most
profound politicians, they might restore new vigor to a crazy administration,
they might stifle of divert general discontents; fill their pockets with
forfeitures, and advance or sink the opinion of publick credit, as either
might answer their private advantage. This might be done by first agreeing
and settling among themselves what suspected persons should be accused
of a plot. Then effectual care is taken to secure all their letters and papers,
and put the criminal in safe and secure custody. These papers might be
delivered to a set of artists of dexterity sufficient to find out the mysterious
meanings of words, syllables, and letters. They should be allowed to put
what interpretation they pleased upon them, giving them a sense not only
which has no relation at all to them, but even what is quite contrary to
their true intent and real meaning; thus for instance, they may, if they so
fancy, interpret a seive to signify a court lady; a lame dog an invader; the
plague a standing army; a buzzard a great statesman; the gout a high priest;
a chamber pot a committee of grandees; a broom a revolution; a mouse
trap an imployment; a bottomless pit a treasury; a sink a court; a cap and
bells a favorite; a broken reed a court of justice; an empty tun a general; a
running sore an Administration.
But should this method fail, recourse might be had to others more
effectual, by learned men called acrosticks and anagrams. First, might be
found men of skill and penetration who can discern that all initial letters
have political meanings. Thus N shall signify a plot; B a regiment of horse; L
a fleet at sea. Or secondly, by transposing the letters of the alphabet in any
suspected paper, who can discover the deepest designs of a discontented
party. So for example, if I should say in a letter to a friend, “Our brother Tom
has just got the piles,” a man of skill in this art would discover how the
same letters which compose that sentence may be analysed into the
following words; “Resist,—a plot is brought home—the tour.” And this is the
anagrammatick method.
The professor made me great acknowledgments for communicating these
observations, and promised to make honourable mention of me in his
treatise.
I saw nothing in this country that could invite me to a longer continuance;
and began to think of returning home to England.


40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 775c-d [n 173]
173. As I have freely anticipated the use of pagans and paganism, I shall
now trace the singular revolutions of those celebrated words. 1. Πάγη, in the
Doric dialect, so familiar to the Italians, signifies a fountain; and the rural
neighbourhood which frequented the same fountain derived the common
appellation of pagus and pagans (Festus sub voce, and Servius ad Virgil.
Georgic. ii. 382). 2. By an easy extension of the word, pagan and rural
became almost synonymous (Plin. Hist. Natur. xxviii. 5); and the meaner
rustics acquired that name, which has been corrupted into peasants in the
modern languages of Europe. 3. The amazing increase of the military order
introduced the necessity of a correlative term (Hume’s Essays, vol. i. p. 555);
and all the people who were not enlisted in the service of the prince were
branded with the contemptuous epithet of pagans (Tacit. Hist. iii. 24, 43, 77.
Juvenal. Satir. 16 [v. 32]. Tertullian de Pallio, c. 4). 4. The Christians were the
soldiers of Christ; their adversaries who refused his sacrament, or military
oath of baptism, might deserve the metaphorical name of pagans; and this
popular reproach was introduced as early as the reign of Valentinian (A.D.
365) into Imperial laws (Cod. Theodos. l. xvi. tit. ii. leg. 18) and theological
writings. 5. Christianity gradually filled the cities of the empire: the old
religion, in the time of Prudentius (advers. Symmachum, l. i. [v. 575 sqq.] ad
fin.) and Orosius (in Præfat. Hist.), retired and languished in obscure villages;
and the word pagans, with its new signification, reverted to its primitive
origin. 6. Since the worship of Jupiter and his family has expired, the vacant
title of Pagans has been successively applied to all the idolaters and
polytheists of the old and new world. 7. The Latin Christians bestowed it,
without scruple, on their mortal enemies the Mahometans; and the purest
Unitarians were branded with the unjust reproach of idolatry and paganism.
See Gerard Vossius, Etymologicon Linguæ Latinæ, in his works, tom. i. p.
420; Godefroy’s Commentary on the Theodosian Code, tom. vi. p. 250; and
Ducange mediæ et infimæ Latinitat. Glossar.


42 KANT: Judgement, 547b-548c
All intuitions by which a priori concepts are given a foothold are, therefore,
either schemata or symbols. Schemata contain direct, symbols indirect,
presentations of the concept. Schemata effect this presentation
demonstratively, symbols by the aid of an analogy (for which recourse is had
even to empirical intuitions), in which analogy judgement performs a double
function: first in applying the concept to the object of a sensible intuition,
and then, secondly, in applying the mere rule of its reflection upon that
intuition to quite another object, of which the former is but the symbol. In
this way, a monarchical state is represented as a living body when it is
governed by constitutional laws, but as a mere machine (like a hand-mill)
when it is governed by an individual absolute will; but in both cases the
representation is merely symbolic. For there is certainly no likeness between
a despotic state and a hand-mill, whereas there surely is between the rules
of reflection upon both and their causality. Hitherto this function has been
but little analysed, worthy as it is of a deeper study. Still this is not the
place to dwell upon it. In language we have many such indirect
presentations modelled upon an analogy enabling the expression in
question to contain, not the proper schema for the concept, but merely a
symbol for reflection. Thus the words ground (support, basis), to depend (to
be held up from above), to flow from (instead of to follow), substance (as
Locke puts it: the support of accidents), and numberless others, are not
schematic, but rather symbolic hypotyposes, and express concepts without
employing a direct intuition for the purpose, but only drawing upon an
analogy with one, i.e., transferring the reflection upon an object of intuition
to quite a new concept, and one with which perhaps no intuition could ever
directly correspond. Supposing the name of knowledge may be given to
what only amounts to a mere mode of representation (which is quite
permissible where this is not a principle of the theoretical determination of
the object in respect of what it is in itself, but of the practical
determination of what the idea of it ought to be for us and for its final
employment), then all our knowledge of God is merely symbolic; and one
who takes it, with the properties of understanding, will, and so forth, which
only evidence their objective reality in beings of this world, to be schematic,
falls into anthropomorphism, just as, if he abandons every intuitive element,
he falls into Deism which furnishes no knowledge whatsoever—not even
from a practical point of view.
Now, I say, the beautiful is the symbol of the morally good, and only in this
light (a point of view natural to every one, and one which every one exacts
from others as a duty) does it give us pleasure with an attendant claim to
the agreement of every one else, whereupon the mind becomes conscious
of a certain ennoblement and elevation above mere sensibility to pleasure
from impressions of sense, and also appraises the worth of others on the
score of a like maxim of their judgement. This is that intelligible to which
taste, as noticed in the preceding paragraph, extends its view. It is, that is
to say, what brings even our higher cognitive faculties into common accord,
and is that apart from which sheer contradiction would arise between their
nature and the claims put forward by taste. In this faculty, judgement does
not find itself subjected to a heteronomy of laws of experience as it does in
the empirical estimate of things—in respect of the objects of such a pure
delight it gives the law to itself, just as reason does in respect of the faculty
of desire. 240 Here, too, both on account of this inner possibility in the
subject, and on account of the external possibility of a nature harmonizing
therewith, it finds a reference in itself to something in the subject itself and
outside it, and which is not nature, nor yet freedom, but still is connected
with the ground of the latter, i.e., the supersensible—a something in which
the theoretical faculty gets bound up into unity with the practical in an
intimate and obscure manner. We shall bring out a few points of this
analogy, while taking care, at the same time, not to let the points of
difference escape us.
(1) The beautiful pleases immediately (but only in reflective intuition, not,
like morality, in its concept).241 (2) It pleases apart from all interest (pleasure
in the morally good is no doubt necessarily bound up with an interest, but
not with one the kind that are antecedent to the judgement upon the
delight, but with one that judgement itself for the first time calls into
existence). (3) The freedom of the imagination (consequently of our faculty
in respect of its sensibility) is, in estimating the beautiful, represented as in
accord with the understanding’s conformity to law (in moral judgements the
freedom of the will is thought as the harmony of the latter with itself
according to universal laws of Reason). (4) The subjective principles of the
estimate of the beautiful is represented as universal, i.e., valid for every
man, but as incognizable by means of any universal concept (the objective
principle of morality is set forth as also universal, i.e., for all individuals,
and, at the same time, for all actions of the same individual, and, besides,
as cognizable by means of a universal concept). For this reason the moral
240
      [Cf. the reference to heteronomy and autonomy, p. 546.]
241
      [Cf. pp. 488, 512.]
judgement not alone admits of definite constitutive principles, but is only
possible by adopting these principles and their universality as the ground of
its maxims.
Even common understanding is wont to pay regard to this analogy; and we
frequently apply to beautiful objects of nature or of art names that seem to
rely upon the basis of a moral estimate. We call buildings or trees majestic
and stately, or plains laughing and gay; even colours are called innocent,
modest, soft, because they excite sensations containing something
analogous to the consciousness of the state of mind produced by moral
judgements. Taste makes, as it were, the transition from the charm of sense
to habitual moral interest possible without too violent a leap, for it
represents the imagination, even in its freedom, as amenable to a final
determination for understanding, and teaches us to find, even in sensuous
objects, a free delight apart from any charm of sense.


53 JAMES: Psychology, 380a-381a; 689a-b
Psychology, 380a-381a
To sum up, then, we see that the difference between the three kinds of
association reduces itself to a simple difference in the amount of that
portion of the nerve-tract supporting the going thought which is operative in
calling up the thought which comes. But the modus operandi of this active
part is the same, be it large or be it small. The items constituting the
coming object waken in every instance because their nerve-tracts once
were excited continuously with those of the going object or its operative
part. This ultimate physiological law of habit among the neural elements is
what runs the train. The direction of its course and the form of its
transitions, whether redintegrative, associative, or similar, are due to
unknown regulative or determinative conditions which accomplish their
effect by opening this switch and closing that, setting the engine sometimes
at half-speed, and coupling or uncoupling cars.
This last figure of speech, into which I have glided unwittingly, affords itself
an excellent instance of association by similarity. I was thinking of the
deflections of the course of ideas. Now, from Hobbes’s time downward,
English writers have been fond of speaking of the train of our
representations. This word happened to stand out in the midst of my
complex thought with peculiarly sharp accentuation, and to surround itself
with numerous details of railroad imagery. Only such details became clear,
however, as had their nerve-tracts besieged by a double set of
influences—those from train on the one hand, and those from the
movement of thought on the other. It may possibly be that the prepotency
of the suggestions of the word train at this moment were due to the recent
excitation of the railroad brain-tract by the instance of a railroad king
playing football with the stock-market.
It is apparent from such an example how inextricably complex are all the
contributory factors whose resultant is the line of our reverie. It would be
folly in most cases to attempt to trace them out. From an instance like the
above, where the pivot of the Similar Association was formed by a definite
concrete word, train, to those where it is so subtile as utterly to elude our
analysis, the passage is unbroken. We can form a series of examples. When
Mr. Bagehot says that the mind of the savage, so far from being in a state of
nature, is tattooed all over with monstrous superstitions, the case is very
like the one we have just been considering. When Sir James Stephen
compares our belief in the uniformity of nature, the congruity of the future
with the past, to a man rowing one way and looking another, and steering
his boat by keeping her stern in a line with an object behind him, the
operative link becomes harder to dissect out. It is subtler still in Dr.
Holmes's phrase, that stories in passing from mouth to mouth make a great
deal of lee-way in proportion to their headway; or in Mr. Lowell's description
of German sentences, that they have a way of yawing and going
stern-foremost and not minding the helm for several minutes after it has
been put down. And finally, it is a real puzzle when the color pale-blue is
said to have feminine and blood-red masculine affinities. And if I hear a
friend describe a certain family as having blotting-paper voices, the image,
though immediately felt to be apposite, baffles the utmost powers of
analysis. The higher poets all use abrupt epithets, which are alike intimate
and remote, and, as Emerson says, sweetly torment us with invitations to
their inaccessible homes.
In these latter instances we must suppose that there is an identical portion
in the similar objects, and that its brain-tract is energetically operative,
without, however, being sufficiently isolable in its activity as to stand out
per se, and form the condition of a distinctly discriminated “abstract idea.”
We cannot even by careful search see the bridge over which we passed
from the heart of one representation to that of the next. In some brains,
however, this mode of transition is extremely common. It would be one of
the most important of physiological discoveries could we assign the
mechanical or chemical difference which makes the thoughts of one brain
cling close to impartial redintegration, while those of another shoot about in
all the lawless revelry of similarity. Why, in these latter brains, action should
tend to focalize itself in small spots, while in the others it fills patiently its
broad bed, it seems impossible to guess. Whatever the difference may be, it
is what separates the man of genius from the prosaic creature of habit and
routine thinking. In Chapter XXII we shall need to recur to this point.
Psychology, 689a-b
As it is with reasons, so it is with words. The first words are probably
always names of entire things and entire actions, of extensive coherent
groups. A new experience in the primitive man can only be talked about by
him in terms of the old experiences which have received names. It reminds
him of certain ones from among them, but the points in which it agrees
with them are neither named nor dissociated. Pure similarity must work
before the abstraction can work which is based upon it. The first adjectives
will therefore probably be total nouns embodying the striking character. The
primeval man will say, not “the bread is hard,” but “the bread is stone”; not
“the face is round,” but “the face is moon”; not “the fruit is sweet,” but “the
fruit is sugar-cane.” The first words are thus neither particular nor general,
but vaguely concrete; just as we speak of an “oval” face, a “velvet” skin, or
an “iron” will, without meaning to connote any other attributes of the
adjective-noun that those in which it does resemble the noun it is used to
qualify. After a while certain of these adjectively-used nouns come only to
signify the particular quality for whose sake they are oftenest used; the
entire thing which they originally meant receives another name, and they
become true abstract and general terms. Oval, for example, with us
suggests only shape. The first abstract qualities thus formed are, no doubt,
qualities of one and the same sense found in different objects—as big,
sweet; next analogies between different senses, as “sharp” of taste, “high”
of sound, etc.; then analogies of motor combinations, or form of relation, as
simple, confused, difficult, reciprocal, relative, spontaneous, etc. The
extreme degree of subtlety in analogy is reached in such cases as when we
say certain English art critics’ writing reminds us of a close room in which
pastilles have been burning, or that the mind of certain Frenchmen is like
old Roquefort cheese. Here language utterly fails to hit upon the basis of
resemblance.
Over immense departments of our thought we are still, all of us, in the
savage state. Similarity operates in us, but abstraction has not taken place.
We know what the present case is like, we know what it reminds us of, we
have an intuition of the right course to take, if it be a practical matter. But
analytic thought has made no tracks, and we cannot justify ourselves to
others. In ethical, psychological, and æsthetic matters, to give a clear
reason for one’s judgment is universally recognized as a mark of rare genius.
The helplessness of uneducated people to account for their likes and
dislikes is often ludicrous. Ask the first Irish girl why she likes this country
better or worse than her home, and see how much she can tell you. But if
you ask your most educated friend why he prefers Titian to Paul Veronese,
you will hardly get more of a reply; and you will probably get absolutely
none if you inquire why Beethoven reminds him of Michelangelo, or how it
comes that a bare figure with unduly flexed joints, by the latter, can so
suggest the moral tragedy of life. His thought obeys a nexus, but cannot
name it. And so it is with all those judgments of experts, which even though
unmotived are so valuable. Saturated with experience of a particular class
of materials, an expert intuitively feels whether a newly-reported fact is
probable or not, whether a proposed hypothesis is worthless or the reverse.


54 FREUD: General Introduction, 510b-c; 512d-513a
General Introduction, 510b-c
In the myths of the births of heroes, a comparative study of which has been
made by O. Rank—the earliest is that of King Sargon of Akkad, about 2800
B.C.—exposure in water and rescue from it play a major part. Rank
perceived that this symbolizes birth in a manner analogous to that
employed in dreams. When anyone in his dream rescues somebody from
the water, he makes that person into his mother, or at any rate a mother;
and in mythology, whoever rescues a child from water confesses herself to
be its real mother. There is a well-known joke in which an intelligent Jewish
boy, when asked who was the mother of Moses, answers immediately: “The
Princess.” He is told: “No, she only took him out of the water.” “That’s what
she said,” he replies, showing that he had hit upon the right interpretation
of the myth.
Going away on a journey stands in dreams for dying; similarly, it is the
custom in the nursery, when a child asks questions as to the whereabouts
of someone who has died and whom he misses, to tell him that that person
has “gone away.” Here again, I deprecate the idea that the dream-symbol
has its origin in this evasive reply to the child. The poet uses the same
symbol when he speaks of the other side as “the undiscovered country
from whose bourne no traveller returns.” Again, in everyday speech it is
quite usual to speak of the “last journey,” and everyone who is acquainted
with ancient rites knows how seriously the idea of a journey into the land of
the dead was taken, for instance, in ancient Egyptian belief. In many cases
the Book of the Dead survives, which was given to the mummy, like a
Baedeker, to take with him on the last journey. Since burial-grounds have
been placed at a distance from the houses of the living, the last journey of
the dead has indeed become a reality.
Nor does sexual symbolism belong only to dreams. You will all know the
expression a baggage as applied contemptuously to a woman, but perhaps
people do not know that they are using a genital symbol. In the New
Testament we read: “The woman is the weaker vessel.” The sacred writings
of the Jews, the style of which so closely approaches that of poetry, are full
of expressions symbolic of sex, which have not always been correctly
interpreted and the exegesis of which, e.g. in the Song of Solomon, has led
to many misunderstandings.242 In later Hebrew literature the woman is very
frequently represented by a house, the door standing for the genital
opening; thus a man complains, when he finds a woman no longer a virgin,
that “he has found the door open.” The symbol table for a woman also
occurs in this literature; the woman says of her husband “I spread the table
for him, but he overturned it.” Lame children are said to owe their infirmity
to the fact that the man “overturned the table.” I quote here from a treatise
by L. Levy in Brünn: Sexual Symbolism in the Bible and the Talmud.

General Introduction, 512d-513a
Let us consider a collection of such charms in the form of tiny silver
pendants: a four-leaved clover, a pig, a mushroom, a horseshoe, a ladder
and a chimney-sweep. The four-leaved clover has taken the place of that
with three leaves, which was really more appropriate for the purpose of
symbolism; the pig is an ancient symbol of fruitfulness; the mushroom
undoubtedly symbolizes the penis, there are mushrooms which derive their
name from their unmistakable resemblance to that organ ( Phallus
impudicus); the horseshoe reproduces the contour of the female genital
opening; while the chimney-sweep with his ladder belongs to this company
because his occupation is one which is vulgarly compared with sexual
intercourse. (Cf. Anthropophyteia.) We have learnt to recognize his ladder in
dreams as a sexual symbol: expressions in language show what a
completely sexual significance the word steigen (to mount) has, as in the
phrases: Den Frauen nachsteigen (to run after women) and ein alter Steiger
(an old roué). So, in French, where the word for step is la marche, we find
the quite analogous expression for an old rake: un vieux marcheur. Probably
the fact that with many of the larger animals sexual intercourse
necessitates a mounting or climbing upon the female has something to do
with this association of ideas.
Pulling off a branch to symbolize onanism is not only in agreement with
vulgar descriptions of that act, but also has far-reaching parallels in
mythology. But especially remarkable is the representation of onanism, or
rather of castration as the punishment for onanism, by the falling-out or
extraction of teeth; for we find in folk-lore a counterpart to this which
could only be known to very few dreamers. I think that there can be no
doubt that circumcision, a practice common to so many peoples, is an
equivalent and replacement of castration. And recently we have learnt that
certain aboriginal tribes in Australia practice circumcision as a rite to mark
the attaining of puberty (at the celebration of the boy’s coming of age),
whilst other tribes living quite near have substituted for this practice that
of knocking out a tooth.

242
      e. g., Song of Sol. 8. 10.
I will end my account with these examples. They are only examples; we
know more about this subject and you can imagine how much richer and
more interesting a collection of this sort might be made, not by dilettanti
like ourselves, but by real experts in mythology, anthropology, philology and
folk-lore. We are forced to certain conclusions, which cannot be exhaustive,
but nevertheless will give us plenty to think about.
