4b. The dependence of demonstration on univocal terms: formal
fallacies due to equivocation
8 ARISTOTLE: Prior Analytics, BK I, CH 34 66b-c / Posterior Analytics, BK I,
CH 11 [77a5-9] 105d-106a / Topics, BK VIII, CH 3 [158b8-17] 215b / Sophistical
Refutations, CH 4 [165b24-166b21] 228b-229c; CH 24 [179b38-180a7]
247d-248a / Heavens, BK I, CH 11 [280b1-7] 371d-372a / Metaphysics, BK IV,
CH 4 [1006a33-b12] 525c-d

9 ARISTOTLE: Rhetoric, BK II, CH 24 [1401a13-23] 650b

12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK I, CH 7 112b-113d

19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 1, A 10, REP 1 9c-10c; Q 13, A 5,
ANS 66b-67d

23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART I, 57d-58a; PART III, 172a

35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK III, CH IX, SECT 15-16 288d-289c; CH X,
SECT 22 297c-298a; CH XI, SECT 7-26 301a-306d passim

35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT VIII, DIV 62-63 478b-d

36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 307b-308b
8 ARISTOTLE: Prior Analytics, BK I, CH 34 66b-c / Posterior
Analytics, BK I, CH 11 [77a5-9] 105d-106a / Topics, BK VIII, CH 3
[158b8-17] 215b / Sophistical Refutations, CH 4 [165b24-166b21]
228b-229c; CH 24 [179b38-180a7] 247d-248a / Heavens, BK I, CH
11 [280b1-7] 371d-372a / Metaphysics, BK IV, CH 4 [1006a33-b12]
525c-d
Prior Analytics, BK I, CH 34 66b-c
                                         34
     a
48 Men will frequently fall into fallacies through not setting out the terms
of the premiss well, e. g. suppose A to be health, B disease, C man. It is
true to say that A cannot belong to any B (for health belongs to no disease)
and again that B belongs to every C (for every man is capable of disease). It
would seem to follow that health cannot belong to any man. The reason for
this is that the terms are not set out well in the statement, since if the
things which are in the conditions are substituted, no syllogism can be
made, e. g. if ‘healthy’ is substituted for ‘health’ and ‘diseased’ for ‘disease’.
For it is not true to say that being healthy cannot belong to one who is
diseased. But unless this is assumed no conclusion results, save in respect
of possibility: but such a conclusion is not impossible: for it is possible that
health should belong to no man. Again the fallacy may occur in a similar
way in the middle figure: ‘it is not possible that health should belong to any
disease, but it is possible that health should belong to every man,
consequently it is not possible that disease should belong to any man’. In
the third figure the fallacy results in reference to possibility. For health and
disease, and knowledge and ignorance, and in general contraries, may
possibly belong to the same thing, but cannot belong to one another. This is
not in agreement with what was said before: for we stated 1 that when
several things could belong to the same thing, they could belong to one
another.
It is evident then that in all these cases the fallacy arises from the setting
out of the terms: for if the things that are in the conditions are substituted,
no fallacy arises. It is clear then that in such premisses what possesses the
condition ought always to be substituted for the condition and taken as the
term.

Posterior Analytics, BK I, CH 11 [77 a5-9] 105d-106a
So demonstration does not necessarily imply the being of Forms nor a One
beside a Many, but it does necessarily imply the possibility of truly
predicating one of many; since without this possibility we cannot save the
universal, and if the universal goes, the middle term goes with it, and so

1
    39a 14-19.
demonstration becomes impossible. We conclude, then, that there must be
a single identical term unequivocally predicable of a number of individuals.

Topics, BK VIII, CH 3 [158 b8-17] 215b
The hardest, however, of all definitions to treat in argument are those that
employ terms about which, in the first place, it is uncertain whether they
are used in one sense or several, and, further, whether they are used
literally or metaphorically by the definer. For because of their obscurity, it is
impossible to argue upon such terms; and because of the impossibility of
saying whether this obscurity is due to their being used metaphorically, it is
impossible to refute them.
In general, it is safe to suppose that, whenever any problem proves
intractable, it either needs definition or else bears either several senses, or
a metaphorical sense, or it is not far removed from the first principles;

Sophistical Refutations, CH 4 [165 b24-166b21] 228b-229c
There are two styles of refutation: for some depend on the language used,
while some are independent of language. Those ways of producing the false
appearance of an argument which depend on language are six in number:
they are ambiguity, amphiboly, combination, division of words, accent, form
of expression. Of this we may assure ourselves both by induction, and by
syllogistic proof based on this—and it may be on other assumptions as
well—that this is the number of ways in which we might fail to mean the
same thing by the same names or expressions. Arguments such as the
following depend upon ambiguity. ‘Those learn who know: for it is those
who know their letters who learn the letters dictated to them.’ For to ‘learn’
is ambiguous; it signifies both ‘to understand’ by the use of knowledge, and
also ‘to acquire knowledge’. Again, ‘Evils are good: for what needs to be is
good, and evils must needs be’. For ‘what needs to be’ has a double
meaning: it means what is inevitable, as often is the case with evils, too (for
evil of some kind is inevitable), while on the other hand we say of good
things as well that they ‘need to be’. Moreover, ‘The same man is both
seated and standing and he is both sick and in health: for it is he who
stood up who is standing, and he who is 166a recovering who is in health:
but it is the seated man who stood up, and the sick man who was
recovering’. For ‘The sick man does so and so’, or ‘has so and so done to
him’ is not single in meaning: sometimes it means ‘the man who is sick or
is seated now’, sometimes ‘the man who was sick formerly’. Of course, the
man who was recovering was the sick man, who really was sick at the time:
but the man who is in health is not sick at the same time: he is ‘the sick
man’ in the sense not that he is sick now, but that he was sick formerly.
Examples such as the following depend upon amphiboly: ‘I wish that you
the enemy may capture’. Also the thesis, ‘There must be knowledge of what
one knows’: for it is possible by this phrase to mean that knowledge
belongs to both the knower and the known. Also, ‘There must be sight of
what one sees: one sees the pillar: ergo the pillar has sight’. Also, ‘What you
profess to-be, that you profess-to-be: you profess a stone to-be: ergo you
profess-to-be a stone’. Also, ‘Speaking of the silent is possible’: for
‘speaking of the silent’ also has a double meaning: it may mean that the
speaker is silent or that the things of which he speaks are so. There are
three varieties of these ambiguities and amphibolies: (1) When either the
expression or the name has strictly more than one meaning, e.g. ἀετός and
the ‘dog’; (2) when by custom we use them so; (3) when words that have a
simple sense taken alone have more than one meaning in combination; e.g.
‘knowing letters’. For each word, both ‘knowing’ and ‘letters’, possibly has a
single meaning: but both together have more than one—either that the
letters themselves have knowledge or that someone else has it of them.
Amphiboly and ambiguity, then, depend on these modes of speech. Upon
the combination of words there depend instances such as the following: ‘A
man can walk while sitting, and can write while not writing’. For the
meaning is not the same if one divides the words and if one combines them
in saying that ‘it is possible to walk-while-sitting’ [and write while not
writing]. The same applies to the latter phrase, too, if one combines the
words ‘to write-while-not-writing’: for then it means that he has the power
to write and not to write at once; whereas if one does not combine them, it
means that when he is not writing he has the power to write. Also, ‘He
knows now if he has learnt his letters’. Moreover, there is the saying that
‘One single thing if you can carry a crowd you can carry too’.
Upon division depend the propositions that 5 is 2 and 3, and even and odd,
and that the greater is equal: for it is that amount and more besides. For
the same phrase would not be thought always to have the same meaning
when divided and when combined, e.g. ‘I made thee a slave once a free
man’, and ‘God-like Achilles left fifty a hundred men’.
An argument depending upon accent it is 166b not easy to construct in
unwritten discussion; in written discussions and in poetry it is easier. Thus
(e.g.) some people emend Homer against those who criticize as unnatural
his expression τὸ μὲν οὗ καταπθεται ὄμβρῳ.2 For they solve the difficulty by a
change of accent, pronouncing the ου with an acuter accent. Also, in the
passage about Agamemnon’s dream, they say that Zeus did not himself say
‘We grant him the fulfilment of his prayer’, 3 but that he bade the dream
grant it. Instances such as these, then, turn upon the accentuation.
Others come about owing to the form of expression used, when what is
really different is expressed in the same form, e.g. a masculine thing by a
feminine termination, or a feminine thing by a masculine, or a neuter by
2
    Iliad, XXIII. 328.
3
    Ibid., XXI. 297.
either a masculine or a feminine; or, again, when a quality is expressed by a
termination proper to quantity or vice versa, or what is active by a passive
word, or a state by an active word, and so forth with the other divisions
previously4 laid down. For it is possible to use an expression to denote what
does not belong to the class of actions at all as though it did so belong.
Thus (e.g.) ‘flourishing’ is a word which in the form of its expression is like
‘cutting’ or ‘building’: yet the one denotes a certain quality—i.e. a certain
condition—while the other denotes a certain action. In the same manner
also in the other instances.
Refutations, then, that depend upon language are drawn from these
common-place rules. Of fallacies, on the other hand, that are independent
of language there are seven kinds: . . .

Sophistical Refutations, CH 24 [179 b38-180a7] 247d-248a
Some people also use the principle of ambiguity to solve the aforesaid
reasonings, e.g. the proof that ‘X is your father’, or ‘son’, or ‘slave’. Yet it is
evident that if the appearance 180a of a proof depends upon a plurality of
meanings, the term, or the expression in question, ought to bear a number
of literal senses, whereas no one speaks of A as being ‘B’s child’ in the
literal sense, if B is the child’s master, but the combination depends upon
Accident. ‘Is A yours?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘And is A a child?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Then the child A is
yours,’ because he happens to be both yours and a child; but he is not ‘your
child’.

Heavens, BK I, CH 11 [280 b1-7] 371d-372a
280b We must first distinguish the senses in which we use the words
‘ungenerated’ and ‘generated’, ‘destructible’ and ‘indestructible’. These have
many meanings, and though it may make no difference to the argument, yet
some confusion of mind must result from treating as uniform in its use a
word which has several distinct applications. The character which is the
ground of the predication will always remain obscure.

Metaphysics, BK IV, CH 4 [1006a33-b12] 525c-d
Again, if 'man' has one meaning, let this be 'two-footed animal'; by having
one meaning I understand this:—if 'man' means 'X', then if A is a man 'X'
will be what 'being a man' means for him. (It makes no difference even if
one were to say a word has several meanings, if only they are limited in
number; for to 1006b each definition there might be assigned a different
word. For instance, we might say that 'man' has not one meaning but
several, one of which would have one definition, viz. 'two-footed animal',
while there might be also several other definitions if only they were limited

4
    Topics, 1. 9.
in number; for a peculiar name might be assigned to each of the
definitions. If, however, they were not limited but one were to say that the
word has an infinite number of meanings, obviously reasoning would be
impossible; for not to have one meaning is to have no meaning, and if
words have no meaning our reasoning with one another, and indeed with
ourselves, has been annihilated; for it is impossible to think of anything if
we do not think of one thing; but if this is possible, one name might be
assigned to this thing.)


9 ARISTOTLE: Rhetoric, BK II, CH 24 [1401a13-23] 650b
(b) Another variety is based on the use of similar words for different things;
e.g. the argument that the mouse must be a noble creature, since it gives
its name to the most august of all religious rites—for such the Mysteries
are. Or one may introduce, into a eulogy of the dog, the dog-star; or Pan,
because Pindar said:
       O thou blessed one!
       Thou whom they of Olympus call
       The hound of manifold shape
       That follows the Mother of Heaven: 5
or we may argue that, because there is much disgrace in there not being a
dog about, there is honour in being a dog. Or that Hermes is readier than
any other god to go shares, since we never say ‘shares all round’ except of
him. Or that speech is a very excellent thing, since good men are not said
to be worth money but to be worthy of esteem—the phrase ‘worthy of
esteem’ also having the meaning of ‘worth speech’.


12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK I, CH 7 112b-113d
Chapter 7. Of the use of sophistical arguments, and hypothetical, and the
like
The handling of sophistical and hypothetical arguments, and of those which
derive their conclusions from questioning, and in a word the handling of all
such arguments, related to the duties of life, though the many do not know
this truth. For in every matter we inquire how the wise and good man shall
discover the proper path and the proper method of dealing with the matter.
Let, then, people either say that the grave man will not descend into the
contest of question and answer, or that, if he does descend into the
contest, he will take no care about not conducting himself rashly or
carelessly in questioning and answering. But if they do not allow either the
one or the other of these things, they must admit that some inquiry ought
to be made into those topics on which particularly questioning and

5
    Pindar, fr. 96, Bergk.
answering are employed. For what is the end proposed in reasoning? To
establish true propositions, to remove the false, to withhold assent from
those which are not plain. Is it enough then to have learned only this? “It is
enough,” a man may reply. Is it, then, also enough for a man, who would not
make a mistake in the use of coined money, to have heard this precept,
that he should receive the genuine drachmæ and reject the spurious? “It is
not enough.” What, then, ought to be added to this precept? What else than
the faculty which proves and distinguishes the genuine and the spurious
drachmæ? Consequently also in reasoning what has been said is not
enough; but is it necessary that a man should acquire the faculty of
examining and distinguishing the true and the false, and that which is not
plain? “It is necessary.” Besides this, what is proposed in reasoning? “That
you should accept what follows from that which you have properly granted.”
Well, is it then enough in this case also to know this? It is not enough; but
a man must learn how one thing is a consequence of other things, and
when one thing follows from one thing, and when it follows from several
collectively. Consider, then, if it be not necessary that this power should
also be acquired by him who purposes to conduct himself skillfully in
reasoning, the power of demonstrating himself the several things which he
has proposed, and the power of understanding the demonstrations of
others, and of not being deceived by sophists, as if they were
demonstrating. Therefore there has arisen among us the practice and
exercise of conclusive arguments and figures, and it has been shown to be
necessary.
But in fact in some cases we have properly granted the premisses or
assumptions, and there results from them something; and though it is not
true, yet none the less it does result. What then ought I to do? Ought I to
admit the falsehood? And how is that possible? Well, should I say that I did
not properly grant that which we agreed upon? “But you are not allowed to
do even this.” Shall I then say that the consequence does not arise through
what has been conceded? “But neither is it allowed.” What then must be
done in this case? Consider if it is not this: as to have borrowed is not
enough to make a man still a debtor, but to this must be added the fact
that he continues to owe the money and that the debt is not paid, so it is
not enough to compel you to admit the inference that you have granted the
premisses, but you must abide by what you have granted. Indeed, if the
premisses continue to the end such as they were when they were granted,
it is absolutely necessary for us to abide by what we have granted, and we
must accept their consequences: but if the premisses do not remain such
as they were when they were granted, it is absolutely necessary for us also
to withdraw from what we granted, and from accepting what does not
follow from the words in which our concessions were made. For the
inference is now not our inference, nor does it result with our assent, since
we have withdrawn from the premisses which we granted. We ought then
both to examine such kind of premisses, and such change and variation of
them, by which in the course of questioning or answering, or in making the
syllogistic conclusion, or in any other such way, the premisses undergo
variations, and give occasion to the foolish to be confounded, if they do not
see what conclusions are. For what reason ought we to examine? In order
that we may not in this matter be employed in an improper manner nor in a
confused way.
And the same in hypotheses and hypothetical arguments; for it is necessary
sometimes to demand the granting of some hypothesis as a kind of passage
to the argument which follows. Must we then allow every hypothesis that is
proposed, or not allow every one? And if not every one, which should we
allow? And if a man has allowed an hypothesis, must he in every case abide
by allowing it? or must he sometimes withdraw from it, but admit the
consequences and not admit contradictions? Yes; but suppose that a man
says, “If you admit the hypothesis of a possibility, I will draw you to an
impossibility.” With such a person shall a man of sense refuse to enter into
a contest, and avoid discussion and conversation with him? But what other
man than the man of sense can use argumentation and is skillful in
questioning and answering, and incapable of being cheated and deceived by
false reasoning? And shall he enter into the contest, and yet not take care
whether he shall engage in argument not rashly and not carelessly? And if
he does not take care, how can he be such a man as we conceive him to
be? But without some such exercise and preparation, can he maintain a
continuous and consistent argument? Let them show this; and all these
speculations become superfluous, and are absurd and inconsistent with our
notion of a good and serious man.
Why are we still indolent and negligent and sluggish, and why do we seek
pretences for not labouring and not being watchful in cultivating our
reason? “If then I shall make a mistake in these matters may I not have
killed my father?” Slave, where was there a father in this matter that you
could kill him? What, then, have you done? The only fault that was possible
here is the fault which you have committed. This is the very remark which I
made to Rufus6 when he blamed me for not having discovered the one
thing omitted in a certain syllogism: “I suppose,” I said, “that I have burnt
the Capitol.” “Slave,” he replied, “was the thing omitted here the Capitol?”
Or are these the only crimes, to burn the Capitol and to kill your father?
But for a man to use the appearances presented to him rashly and foolishly
and carelessly, and not to understand argument, nor demonstration, nor
sophism, nor, in a word, to see in questioning and answering what is



6
    See i. 1; Plutarch Lives, Tiberius Gracchus.
consistent with that which we have granted or is not consistent; is there no
error in this?


19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 1, A 10, REP 1 9c-10c;
Q 13, A 5, ANS 66b-67d
Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 1, A 10, REP 1 9c-10c
Article 10. Whether in Holy Scripture a Word May Have Several Senses?
We proceed thus to the Tenth Article: It seems that in Holy Writ a word
cannot have several senses, historical or literal, allegorical, tropological or
moral, and anagogical.
Objection 1. For many different senses in one text produce confusion and
deception and destroy all force of argument. Hence no proof, but only
fallacies, can be deduced from a multiplicity of propositions. But Holy Writ
ought to be able to state the truth without any fallacy. Therefore there
cannot be several senses to a word in Holy Writ.
Obj. 2. Further, Augustine says (De util. cred. iii)7 that “the Old Testament
has a fourfold division namely, according to history, etiology, analogy, and
allegory.” Now these four seem altogether different from the four divisions
mentioned in the first objection. Therefore it does not seem fitting to
explain the same word of Holy Writ according to the four different senses
mentioned above.
Obj. 3. Further, besides these senses, there is the parabolical, which is not
one of these four.
On the contrary, Gregory says (Moral, XX, I):8 “Holy Writ by the manner of its
speech transcends every science, because in one and the same sentence,
while it describes a fact, it reveals a mystery.”
I answer that, The author of Holy Writ is God, in whose power it is to signify
His meaning not by words only (as man also can do), but also by things
themselves. So, whereas in every other science things are signified by
words, this science has the property that the things signified by the words
have themselves also a meaning. Therefore that first meaning whereby
words signify things belongs to the first sense, the historical or literal. That
meaning whereby things signified by words have themselves also a meaning
is called the spiritual sense, which is based on the literal, and presupposes
it.
Now this spiritual sense has a threefold division. For as the Apostle says
(Heb. 10. 1) the Old Law is a figure of the New Law, and Dionysius says 9 the
New Law itself is a figure of future glory. Again, in the New Law, whatever
our Head has done is a type of what we ought to do. Therefore, so far as

7
  PL 42, 68.
8
  PL 76, 135.
9
  De Eccl. Hier., V, 2 (PG 3, 501).
the things of the Old Law signify the things of the New Law, there is the
allegorical sense. But so far as the things done in Christ, or so far as the
things which signify Christ, are types of what we ought to do, there is the
moral sense. But so far as they signify what relates to eternal glory, there is
the anagogical sense.
Since the literal sense is that which the author intends, and since the
author of Holy Writ is God, Who by one act comprehends all things by His
intellect, it is not unfitting, as Augustine says 10 if, even according to the
literal sense, one word in Holy Writ should have several senses.
Reply Obj. 1. The multiplicity of these senses does not produce equivocation
or any other kind of multiplicity, seeing that these senses are not multiplied
because one word signifies several things, but because the things signified
by the words can be themselves types of other things. Thus in Holy Writ no
confusion results, for all the senses are founded on one—the literal—from
which alone can any argument be drawn, and not from those intended in
allegory, as Augustine says (Epist. xciii).11 Nevertheless, nothing of Holy
Scripture perishes on account of this, since nothing necessary to faith is
contained under the spiritual sense which is not elsewhere put forward by
the Scripture in its literal sense.
Reply Obj. 2. These three—history, etiology, analogy—are grouped under the
literal sense. For it is called history, as Augustine expounds 12 whenever
anything is simply related; it is called etiology when its cause is assigned, as
when Our Lord gave the reason why Moses allowed the putting away of
wives—namely, on account of the hardness of men's hearts (Matt. 19. 8); it
is called analogy whenever the truth of one text of Scripture is shown not
to contradict the truth of another. Of these four, allegory alone stands for
the three spiritual senses. Thus Hugh of S. Victor ( Sacram. 1, 4)13 includes
the anagogical under the allegorical sense, laying down three senses
only—the historical, the allegorical, and the tropological.
Reply Obj. 3. The parabolical sense is contained in the literal, for by words
things are signified properly and figuratively. Nor is the figure itself, but that
which is figured, the literal sense. When Scripture speaks of God's arm, the
literal sense is not that God has such a member, but only what is signified
by this member, namely, operative power. Hence it is plain that nothing
false can ever underlie the literal sense of Holy Writ.

Summa Theologica, PART I, Q 13, A 5, ANS 66b-67d
Article 5. Whether What Is Said of God and of Creatures Is Univocally
Predicated of Them?

10
   Confessions, XII, 42 (PL 32, 844).
11
   Chap. 8 (PL 33, 334).
12
   De Util. Cred., 3 (PL 42, 68).
13
   PL 176, 184; Cf. De Scriptur. et Scriptor. Sacris., III (PL 175, II).
We proceed thus to the Fifth Article: It seems that what is said of God and
creatures is said of them univocally.
Objection 1. For every equivocal term is reduced to the univocal, as many
are reduced to one; for if the name dog be said equivocally of the barking
dog, and of the dogfish, it must be said of some univocally — namely, of all
barking dogs; otherwise we proceed to infinity. Now there are some
univocal agents which agree with their effects in name and definition, as
man generates man; and there are some agents which are equivocal, as the
sun which causes heat, although the sun is hot only in an equivocal sense.
Therefore it seems that the first agent to which all other agents are
reduced is an univocal agent; and thus what is said of God and creatures is
predicated univocally.
Obj. 2. Further, there is no likeness among equivocal things. Therefore as
creatures have a certain likeness to God, according to the word of Genesis
(1. 26), Let us make man to our image and likeness, it seems that something
can be said of God and creatures univocally.
Obj. 3. Further, “measure is homogeneous” with the thing measured as is
said in the Metaphysics.14 But God is the first measure of all beings, as it
says in the same place. Therefore God is homogeneous with creatures, and
thus a word may be applied univocally to God and to creatures.
On the contrary, Whatever is predicated of various things under the same
name but not in the same meaning is predicated equivocally. But no name
belongs to God in the same meaning that it belongs to creatures; for
instance, wisdom in creatures is a quality, but not in God. Now a different
genus changes a nature, since the genus is part of the definition; and the
same applies to other things. Therefore whatever is said of God and of
creatures is predicated equivocally.
2. Further, God is more distant from creatures than any creatures are from
each other. But the distance of some creatures makes any univocal
predication of them impossible, as in the case of those things which are
not in the same genus. Therefore much less can anything be predicated
univocally of God and creatures. And so only equivocal predication can be
applied to them.
I answer that, Univocal predication is impossible between God and
creatures. The reason of this is that every effect which is not an adequate
result of the power of the efficient cause receives the likeness of the agent
not in its full degree, but in a measure that falls short, so that what is
divided and multiplied in the effects resides in the agent simply, and in the
same manner; as for example the sun by the exercise of its one power
produces manifold and various forms in all inferior things. In the same way,
as said in the preceding article, all perfections of things which exist in

14
     Aristotle, X, I (1053a24).
creatures divided and multiplied pre-exist in God unitedly. Thus, when any
term expressing perfection is applied to a creature, it signifies that
perfection distinct in idea from other perfections; as, for instance, by this
term wise applied to a man, we signify some perfection distinct from a
man's essence, and distinct from his power and being, and from all similar
things; whereas when we apply it to God, we do not mean to signify
anything distinct from His essence, or power, or being. Thus also this term
wise applied to man in some degree circumscribes and comprehends the
thing signified; but this is not the case when it is applied to God, but it
leaves the thing signified as incomprehended, and as exceeding the
signification of the name. Hence it is evident that this term wise is not
applied in the same aspect to God and to man. The same rule applies to
other terms. Hence no name is predicated univocally of God and of
creatures.
Neither, on the other hand, are names applied to God and creatures in a
purely equivocal sense, as some have said. 15 Because if that were so, it
follows that from creatures nothing could be known or demonstrated about
God at all, for the reasoning would always fall into the fallacy of
equivocation. Such a view is as much against philosophy which proves
many things about God as it is against what the Apostle says: The invisible
things of God are clearly seen being understood by the things that are made
(Rom. 1. 20).
Therefore it must be said that these names are said of God and creatures
according to analogy, that is, according to proportion. Now names are thus
used in two ways: either according as many things are proportionate to one,
as for example healthy is predicated of medicine and urine in so far as each
has an order and proportion to the health of the animal, of which the latter
is the sign and the former the cause, or according as one thing is
proportionate to another; thus healthy is said of medicine and animal, since
medicine is the cause of health in the animal. And in this way some things
are said of God and creatures analogically, and not in a purely equivocal nor
in a purely univocal sense. For we can name God only from creatures (A. 1).
Thus whatever is said of God and creatures, is said according to the relation
of a creature to God as its principle and cause, wherein all perfections of
things pre-exist excellently.
Now this mode of community is a mean between pure equivocation and
simple univocation. For in those things which are spoken of analogically
neither is there one notion, as there is in univocal things, nor totally diverse
notions as in equivocal things; but a term which is thus used in a multiple
sense signifies different proportions to some one thing; thus healthy



15
     Maimonides, Guide, I, 59 (FR 84); Averroes, In Meta., XII, comm. 51 (VIII, 337B).
applied to urine signifies the sign of animal health, and applied to medicine
signifies the cause of the same health.
Reply Obj. 1. Although in predication the equivocal must be reduced to the
univocal, still in actions the non-univocal agent must precede the univocal
agent. For the non-univocal agent is the universal cause of the whole
species, as for instance the sun is the cause of the generation of all men.
But the univocal agent is not the universal efficient cause of the whole
species (otherwise it would be the cause of itself, since it is contained in
the species), but is a particular cause of this individual which it places
under the species by way of participation. Therefore the universal cause of
the whole species is not an univocal agent, and the universal cause comes
before the particular cause. But this universal agent while it is not univocal,
nevertheless is not altogether equivocal, otherwise it could not produce its
own likeness; but it can be called an analogical agent, just as in
predications all univocal terms are reduced to one first non-univocal
analogical term, which is being.
Reply Obj. 2. The likeness of the creature to God is imperfect, for it does
not represent one and the same generic thing (Q. IV, A. 3).
Reply Obj. 3. God is not the measure proportioned to things measured;
hence it is not necessary that God and creatures should be in the same
genus.
The arguments adduced in the contrary, prove indeed that these names are
not predicated univocally of God and creatures, yet they do not prove that
they are predicated equivocally.


23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART I, 57d-58a; PART III, 172a
Leviathan, PART I, 57d-58a
When a man, upon the hearing of any speech, hath those thoughts which
the words of that speech, and their connexion, were ordained and
constituted to signify, then he is said to understand it: understanding being
nothing else but conception caused by speech. And therefore if speech be
peculiar to man, as for ought I know it is, then is understanding peculiar to
him also. And therefore of absurd and false affirmations, in case they be
universal, there can be no understanding; though many think they
understand then, when they do but repeat the words softly, or con them in
their mind.
What kinds of speeches signify the appetites, aversions, and passions of
man’s mind, and of their use and abuse, I shall speak when I have spoken
of the passions.
The names of such things as affect us, that is, which please and displease
us, because all men be not alike affected with the same thing, nor the
same man at all times, are in the common discourses of men of inconstant
signification. For seeing all names are imposed to signify our conceptions,
and all our affections are but conceptions; when we conceive the same
things differently, we can hardly avoid different naming of them. For though
the nature of that we conceive be the same; yet the diversity of our
reception of it, in respect of different constitutions of body and prejudices
of opinion, gives everything a tincture of our different passions. And
therefore in reasoning, a man must take heed of words; which besides the
signification of what we imagine of their nature, have a signification also of
the nature, disposition, and interest of the speaker; such as are the names
of virtues and vices: for one man calleth wisdom what another calleth fear;
and one cruelty what another justice; one prodigality what another
magnanimity; and one gravity what another stupidity, etc. And therefore
such names can never be true grounds of any ratiocination. No more can
metaphors and tropes of speech: but these are less dangerous because
they profess their inconstancy, which the other do not.

Leviathan, PART III, 172a
Which question cannot be resolved without a more particular consideration
of the kingdom of God; from whence also, we are to judge of the authority
of interpreting the Scripture. For, whosoever hath a lawful power over any
writing, to make it law, hath the power also to approve or disapprove the
interpretation of the same.
                                  CHAPTER XXXIV
Of the Signification of Spirit, Angel, and Inspiration in the Books of Holy
Scripture
Seeing the foundation of all true ratiocination is the constant signification
of words; which, in the doctrine following, dependeth not (as in natural
science) on the will of the writer, nor (as in common conversation) on vulgar
use, but on the sense they carry in the Scripture; it is necessary, before I
proceed any further, to determine, out of the Bible, the meaning of such
words as by their ambiguity may render what I am to infer upon them
obscure or disputable. I will begin with the words body and spirit, which in
the language of the Schools are termed substances, corporeal and
incorporeal.


35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK III, CH IX, SECT 15-16
288d-289c; CH X, SECT 22 297c-298a; CH XI, SECT 7-26
301a-306d passim
Human Understanding, BK III, CH IX, SECT 15-16 288d-289c
15. With this imperfection, they may serve for civil, but not well for
philosophical use. It is true, as to civil and common conversation, the
general names of substances, regulated in their ordinary signification by
some obvious qualities, (as by the shape and figure in things of known
seminal propagation, and in other substances, for the most part by colour,
joined with some other sensible qualities), do well enough to design the
things men would be understood to speak of: and so they usually conceive
well enough the substances meant by the word gold or apple, to distinguish
the one from the other. But in philosophical inquiries and debates, where
general truths are to be established, and consequences drawn from
positions laid down, there the precise signification of the names of
substances will be found not only not to be well established, but also very
hard to be so. For example: he that shall make malleability, or a certain
degree of fixedness, a part of his complex idea of gold, may make
propositions concerning gold, and draw consequences from them, that will
truly and clearly follow from gold, taken in such a signification: but yet such
as another man can never be forced to admit, nor be convinced of their
truth, who makes not malleableness, or the same degree of fixedness, part
of that complex idea that the name gold, in his use of it, stands for.
16. Instance, liquor. This is a natural and almost unavoidable imperfection in
almost all the names of substances, in all languages whatsoever, which
men will easily find when, once passing from confused or loose notions,
they come to more strict and close inquiries. For then they will be
convinced how doubtful and obscure those words are in their signification,
which in ordinary use appeared very clear and determined. I was once in a
meeting of very learned and ingenious physicians, where by chance there
arose a question, whether any liquor passed through the filaments of the
nerves. The debate having been managed a good while, by variety of
arguments on both sides, I (who had been used to suspect, that the
greatest part of disputes were more about the signification of words than a
real difference in the conception of things) desired, that, before they went
any further on in this dispute, they would first examine and establish
amongst them, what the word liquor signified. They at first were a little
surprised at the proposal; and had they been persons less ingenious, they
might perhaps have taken it for a very frivolous or extravagant one: since
there was no one there that thought not himself to understand very
perfectly what the word liquor stood for; which I think, too, none of the
most perplexed names of substances. However, they were pleased to
comply with my motion; and upon examination found that the signification
of that word was not so settled or certain as they had all imagined; but that
each of them made it a sign of a different complex idea. This made them
perceive that the main of their dispute was about the signification of that
term; and that they differed very little in their opinions concerning some
fluid and subtle matter, passing through the conduits of the nerves; though
it was not so easy to agree whether it was to be called liquor or no, a thing,
which, when considered, they thought it not worth the contending about.

Human Understanding, BK III, CH X, SECT 22 297c-298a
22. VI. By proceeding upon the supposition that the words we use have a
certain and evident signification which other men cannot but understand.
Sixthly, there remains yet another more general, though perhaps less
observed, abuse of words; and that is, that men having by a long and
familiar use annexed to them certain ideas, they are apt to imagine so near
and necessary a connexion between the names and the signification they
use them in, that they forwardly suppose one cannot but understand what
their meaning is; and therefore one ought to acquiesce in the words
delivered, as if it were past doubt that, in the use of those common
received sounds, the speaker and hearer had necessarily the same precise
ideas. Whence presuming, that when they have in discourse used any term,
they have thereby, as it were, set before others the very thing they talked
of. And so likewise taking the words of others as naturally standing for just
what they themselves have been accustomed to apply them to, they never
trouble themselves to explain their own, or understand clearly others'
meaning. From whence commonly proceeds noise, and wrangling, without
improvement or information; whilst men take words to be the constant
regular marks of agreed notions, which in truth are no more but the
voluntary and unsteady signs of their own ideas. And yet men think it
strange, if in discourse, or (where it is often absolutely necessary) in
dispute, one sometimes asks the meaning of their terms: though the
arguings one may every day observe in conversation make it evident, that
there are few names of complex ideas which any two men use for the same
just precise collection. It is hard to name a word which will not be a clear
instance of this. Life is a term, none more familiar. Any one almost would
take it for an affront to be asked what he meant by it. And yet if it comes
in question, whether a plant that lies ready formed in the seed have life;
whether the embryo in an egg before incubation, or a man in a swoon
without sense or motion, be alive or no; it is easy to perseive that a clear,
distinct, settled idea does not always accompany the use of so known a
word as that of life is. Some gross and confused conceptions men indeed
ordinarily have, to which they apply the common words of their language;
and such a loose use of their words serves them well enough in their
ordinary discourses or affairs. But this is not sufficient for philosophical
inquiries. Knowledge and reasoning require precise determinate ideas. And
though men will not be so importunately dull as not to understand what
others say, without demanding an explication of their terms; nor so
troublesomely critical as to correct others in the use of the words they
receive from them: yet, where truth and knowledge are concerned in the
case, I know not what fault it can be, to desire the explication of words
whose sense seems dubious; or why a man should be ashamed to own his
ignorance in what sense another man uses his words; since he has no other
way of certainly knowing it but by being informed. This abuse of taking
words upon trust has nowhere spread so far, nor with so ill effects, as
amongst men of letters. The multiplication and obstinacy of disputes, which
have so laid waste the intellectual world, is owing to nothing more than to
this ill use of words. For though it be generally believed that there is great
diversity of opinions in the volumes and variety of controversies the world
is distracted with; yet the most I can find that the contending learned men
of different parties do, in their arguings one with another, is, that they
speak different languages. For I am apt to imagine, that when any of them,
quitting terms, think upon things, and know what they think, they think all
the same: though perhaps what they would have be different.

Human Understanding, BK III, CH XI, SECT 7-26 301a-306d passim
7. Instance, bat and bird. Whether a bat be a bird or no, is not a question,
Whether a bat be another thing than indeed it is, or have other qualities
than indeed it has; for that would be extremely absurd to doubt of. But the
question is, (1) Either between those that acknowledged themselves to have
but imperfect ideas of one or both of this sort of things, for which these
names are supposed to stand. And then it is a real inquiry concerning the
nature of a bird or a bat, to make their yet imperfect ideas of it more
complete; by examining whether all the simple ideas to which, combined
together, they both give the name bird, be all to be found in a bat: but this
is a question only of inquirers (not disputers) who neither affirm nor deny,
but examine: Or, (2) It is a question between disputants; whereof the one
affirms, and the other denies that a bat is a bird. And then the question is
barely about the signification of one or both these words; in that they not
having both the same complex ideas to which they give these two names,
one holds and the other denies, that these two names may be affirmed one
of another. Were they agreed in the signification of these two names, it
were impossible they should dispute about them. For they would presently
and clearly see (were that adjusted between them), whether all the simple
ideas of the more general name bird were found in the complex idea of a
bat or no; and so there could be no doubt whether a bat were a bird or no.
And here I desire it may be considered, and carefully examined, whether the
greatest part of the disputes in the world are not merely verbal, and about
the signification of words; and whether, if the terms they are made in were
defined, and reduced in their signification (as they must be where they
signify anything) to determined collections of the simple ideas they do or
should stand for, those disputes would not end of themselves, and
immediately vanish. I leave it then to be considered, what the learning of
disputation is, and how well they are employed for the advantage of
themselves or others, whose business is only the vain ostentation of
sounds; i.e. those who spend their lives in disputes and controversies.
When I shall see any of those combatants strip all his terms of ambiguity
and obscurity, (which every one may do in the words he uses himself), I
shall think him a champion for knowledge, truth, and peace, and not the
slave of vain-glory, ambition, or a party.
8. Remedies. To remedy the defects of speech before mentioned to some
degree, and to prevent the inconveniences that follow from them, I imagine
the observation of these following rules may be of use, till somebody better
able shall judge it worth his while to think more maturely on this matter,
and oblige the world with his thoughts on it.
First remedy: To use no word without an idea annexed to it. First, A man
shall take care to use no word without a signification, no name without an
idea for which he makes it stand. This rule will not seem altogether
needless to any one who shall take the pains to recollect how often he has
met with such words as instinct, sympathy, and antipathy, &c., in the
discourse of others, so made use of as he might easily conclude that those
that used them had no ideas in their minds to which they applied them, but
spoke them only as sounds, which usually served instead of reasons on the
like occasions. Not but that these words, and the like, have very proper
significations in which they may be used; but there being no natural
connexion between any words and any ideas, these, and any other, may be
learned by rote, and pronounced or writ by men who have no ideas in their
minds to which they have annexed them, and for which they make them
stand; which is necessary they should, if men would speak intelligibly even
to themselves alone.
9. Second remedy: To have distinct, determinate ideas annexed to words,
especially in mixed modes. Secondly, It is not enough a man uses his words
as signs of some ideas: those he annexes them to, if they be simple, must
be clear and distinct; if complex, must be determinate, 16 i.e. the precise
collection of simple ideas settled in the mind, with that sound annexed to
it, as the sign of that precise determined collection, and no other. This is
very necessary in names of modes, and especially moral words; which,
having no settled objects in nature, from whence their ideas are taken, as
from their original, are apt to be very confused. Justice is a word in every
man’s mouth, but most commonly with a very undertermined, loose
signification; which will always be so, unless a man has in his mind a
distinct comprehension of the component parts that complex idea consists
of: and if it be decompounded, must be able to resolve it still on, till he at
last comes to the simple ideas that make it up: and unless this be done, a

16
     See “Epistle to the Reader,” p. 91.
man makes an ill use of the word, let it be justice, for example, or any
other. I do not say, a man needs stand to recollect, and make this analysis
at large, every time the word justice comes in his way: but this at least is
necessary, that he have so examined the signification of that name, and
settled the idea of all its parts in his mind, that he can do it when he
pleases. If any one who makes his complex idea of justice to be, such a
treatment of the person or goods of another as is according to law, hath
not a clear and distinct idea what law is, which makes a part of his
complex idea of justice, it is plain his idea of justice itself will be confused
and imperfect. This exactness will, perhaps, be judged very troublesome;
and therefore most men will think they may be excused from settling the
complex ideas of mixed modes so precisely in their minds. But yet I must
say, till this be done, it must not be wondered, that they have a great deal
of obscurity and confusion in their own minds, and a great deal of
wrangling in their discourse with others. 17
10. And distinct and conformable ideas in words that stand for substances.
In the names of substances, for a right use of them, something more is
required than barely determined ideas. In these the names must also be
conformable to things as they exist; but of this I shall have occasion to
speak more at large by and by. 18 This exactness is absolutely necessary in
inquiries after philosophical knowledge, and in controversies about truth.
And though it would be well, too, if it extended itself to common
conversation and the ordinary affairs of life; yet I think that is scarce to be
expected. Vulgar notions suit vulgar discourses: and both, though confused
enough, yet serve pretty well the market and the wake. Merchants and
lovers, cooks and tailors, have words wherewithal to dispatch their ordinary
affairs: and so, I think, might philosophers and disputants too, if they had a
mind to understand, and to be clearly understood.
11. Third remedy: To apply words to such ideas as common use has annexed
them to. Thirdly, it is not enough that men have ideas, determined ideas, for
which they make these signs stand; but they must also take care to apply
their words as near as may be to such ideas as common use has annexed
them to. For words, especially of languages already framed, being no man’s
private possession, but the common measure of commerce and
communication, it is not for any one at pleasure to change the stamp they
are current in, nor alter the ideas they are affixed to; or at least, when there
is a necessity to do so, he is bound to give notice of it. Men’s intentions in
speaking are, or at least should be, to be understood; which cannot be
without frequent explanations, demands, and other the like incommodious
interruptions, where men do not follow common use. Propriety of speech is

17
   The famous discussion in the first and second Book of Plato’s Republic, of the “mixed
mode” named justice, is relevant in this connexion.
18
   Cf. § 24; also Bk. IV. chh. iii. §§ 11-17; iv. 11-17.
that which gives our thoughts entrance into other men’s minds with the
greatest ease and advantage: and therefore deserves some part of our care
and study, especially in the names of moral words. The proper signification
and use of terms is best to be learned from those who in their writings and
discourses appear to have had the clearest notions, and applied to them
their terms with the exactest choice and fitness. This way of using a man’s
words, according to the propriety of the language, though it have not always
the good fortune to be understood; yet most commonly leaves the blame of
it on him who is so unskilful in the language he speaks, as not to
understand it when made use of as it ought to be.
12. Fourth remedy: To declare the meaning in which we use them. Fourthly,
But, because common use has not so visibly annexed any signification to
words, as to make men know always certainly what they precisely stand for:
and because men, in the improvement of their knowledge, come to have
ideas different from the vulgar and ordinary received ones, for which they
must either make new words, (which men seldom venture to do, for fear of
being though guilty of affectation or novelty), or else must use old ones in a
new signification: therefore, after the observation of the foregoing rules, it
is sometimes necessary, for the ascertaining the signification of words, to
declare their meaning; where either common use has left it uncertain and
loose, (as it has in most names of very complex ideas); or where the term,
being very material in the discourse, and that upon which it chiefly turns, is
liable to any doubtfulness or mistake.
13. And that in three ways. As the ideas men’s words stand for are of
different sorts, so the way of making known the ideas they stand for, when
there is occasion, is also different. For though defining be thought the
proper way to make known the proper signification of words; yet there are
some words that will not be defined, 19 as there are others whose precise
meaning cannot be made known but by definition: and perhaps a third,
which partake somewhat of both the other, as we shall see in the names of
simple ideas, modes, and substances.
14. I. In simple ideas, either by synonymous terms, or by showing examples.
First, when a man makes use of the name of any simple idea, which he
perceives is not understood, or is in danger to be mistaken, he is obliged, by
the laws of ingenuity and the end of speech, to declare his meaning, and
make known what idea he makes it stand for. This, as has been shown,
cannot be done by definition: and therefore, when a synonymous word fails
to do it, there is but one of these ways left. First, Sometimes the naming
the subject wherein that simple idea is to be found, will make its name to
be understood by those who are acquainted with that subject, and know it
by that name. So to make a countryman understand what feuillemorte

19
     Cf. ch. iii. §§ 4-14.
colour signifies, it may suffice to tell him, it is the colour of withered leaves
falling in autumn. Secondly, but the only sure way of making known the
signification of the name of any simple idea, is by presenting to his senses
that subject which may produce it in his mind, and make him actually have
the idea that word stands for.
15. II. In mixed modes, by definition. Secondly, Mixed modes, especially those
belonging to morality, being most of them such combinations of ideas as
the mind puts together of its own choice, and whereof there are not always
standing patterns to be found existing, the signification of their names
cannot be made known, as those of simple ideas, by any showing: but, in
recompense thereof, may be perfectly and exactly defined. For they being
combinations of several ideas that the mind of man has arbitrarily put
together, without reference to any archetypes, men may, if they please,
exactly know the ideas that go to each composition, and so both use these
words in a certain and undoubted signification, and perfectly declare, when
there is occasion, what they stand for. This, if well considered, would lay
great blame on those who make not their discourses about moral things
very clear and distinct. For since the precise signification of the names of
mixed modes, or, which is all one, the real essence of each species is to be
known, they being not of nature’s, but man’s making, it is a great negligence
and perverseness to discourse of moral things with uncertainty and
obscurity; which is more pardonable in treating of natural substances,
where doubtful terms are hardly to be avoided, for a quite contrary reason,
as we shall see by and by.
16. Morality capable of demonstration. Upon this ground it is that I am bold
to think that morality is capable of demonstration, 20 as well as
mathematics: since the precise real essence of the things moral words
stand for may be perfectly known, and so the congruity and incongruity of
the things themselves be certainly discovered; in which consists perfect
knowledge. Nor let any one object, that the names of substances are often
to be made use of in morality, as well as those of modes, from which will
arise obscurity. For, as to substances, when concerned in moral discourses,
their divers natures are not so much inquired into as supposed: v.g. when
we say that man is subject to law, we mean nothing by man but a corporeal
rational creature: what the real essence or other qualities of that creature
are in this case is no way considered. And, therefore, whether a child or
changeling be a man, in a physical sense, may amongst the naturalists be
as disputable as it will, it concerns not at all the moral man, as I may call
him, which is this immovable, unchangeable idea, a corporeal rational being.
For, were there a monkey, or any other creature, to be found that had the
use of reason to such a degree, as to be able to understand general signs,

20
     Cf. Bk. IV. chh. Iii. §§ 18-20; iv. §§ 7-8; xii. § 8.
and to deduce consequences about general ideas, he would no doubt be
subject to law, and in that sense be a man, how much soever he differed in
shape from others of that name. The names of substances, if they be used
in them as they should, can no more disturb moral than they do
mathematical discourses; where, if the mathematician speaks of a cube or
globe of gold, or of any other body, he has his clear, settled idea, which
varies not, though it may by mistake be applied to a particular body to
which it belongs not.
17. Definitions can make moral discourses clear. This I have here mentioned,
by the by, to show of what consequence it is for men, in their names of
mixed modes, and consequently in all their moral discourses, to define their
words when there is occasion: since thereby moral knowledge may be
brought to so great clearness and certainty. And it must be great want of
ingenuousness (to say no worse of it) to refuse to do it: since a definition is
the only way whereby the precise meaning of moral words can be known;
and yet a way whereby their meaning may be known certainly, and without
leaving any room for any contest about it. And therefore the negligence or
perverseness of mankind cannot be excused, if their discourses in morality
be not much more clear than those in natural philosophy: since they are
about ideas in the mind, which are none of them false or disproportionate;
they having no external beings for the archetypes which they are referred to
and must correspond with. It is far easier for men to frame in their minds
an idea, which shall be the standard to which they will give the name
justice; with which pattern so made, all actions that agree shall pass under
that denomination, than, having seen Aristides, to frame an idea that shall
in all things be exactly like him; who is as he is, let men make what idea
they please of him. For the one, they need but know the combination of
ideas that are put together in their own minds; for the other, they must
inquire into the whole nature, and abstruse hidden constitution, and various
qualities of a thing existing without them.
18. And is the only way in which the meaning of mixed modes can be made
known. Another reason that makes the defining of mixed modes so
necessary, especially of moral words, is what I mentioned a little before, viz.
that it is the only way whereby the signification of the most of them can be
known with certainty. For the ideas they stand for, being for the most part
such whose component parts nowhere exist together, but scattered and
mingled with others, it is the mind alone that collects them, and gives them
the union of one idea: and it is only by words enumerating the several
simple ideas which the mind has united, that we can make known to others
what their names stand for; the assistance of the senses in this case not
helping us, by the proposal of sensible objects, to show the ideas which our
names of this kind stand for, as it does often in the names of sensible
simple ideas, and also to some degree in those of substances.
19. III. In substances, both by showing and by defining. Thirdly, for the
explaining the signification of the names of substances, as they stand for
the ideas we have of their distinct species, both the forementioned ways,
viz. of showing and defining, are requisite, in many cases, to be made use
of. For, there being ordinarily in each sort some leading qualities, to which
we suppose the other ideas which make up our complex idea of that
species annexed, we forwardly give the specific name to that thing wherein
that characteristical mark is found, which we take to be the most
distinguishing idea of that species. These leading or characteristical (as I
may call them) ideas, in the sorts of animals and vegetables, are (as has
been before remarked, ch. vi. § 29, and ch. ix. § 15) mostly figure; and in
inanimate bodies, colour; and in some, both together. Now,
20. Ideas of the leading qualities of substances are best got by showing.
These leading sensible qualities are those which make the chief ingredients
of our specific ideas, and consequently the most observable and invariable
part in the definitions of our specific names, as attributed to sorts of
substances coming under our knowledge. For though the sound man, in its
own nature, be as apt to signify a complex idea made up of animality and
rationality, united in the same subject, as to signify any other combination;
yet, used as a mark to stand for a sort of creatures we count of our own
kind, perhaps the outward shape is as necessary to be taken into our
complex idea, signified by the word man, as any other we find in it: and
therefore, why Plato’s animal implume bipes latis unguibus should not be a
good definition of the name man, standing for that sort of creatures, will
not be easy to show: for it is the shape, as the leading quality, that seems
more to determine that species, than a faculty of reasoning, which appears
not at first, and in some never. And if this be not allowed to be so, I do not
know how they can be excused from murder who kill monstrous births, (as
we call them), because of an unordinary shape, without knowing whether
they have a rational soul or no; which can be no more discerned in a
well-formed than ill-shaped infant, as soon as born. And who is it has
informed us that a rational soul can inhabit no tenement, unless it has just
such a sort of frontispiece; or can join itself to, and inform no sort of body,
but one that is just of such an outward structure?
21. And can hardly be made known otherwise. Now these leading qualities
are best made known by showing, and can hardly be made known
otherwise. For the shape of a horse or cassowary will be but rudely and
imperfectly imprinted on the mind by words; the sight of the animals doth
it a thousand times better. And the idea of the particular colour of gold is
not to be got by any description of it, but only by the frequent exercise of
the eyes about it; as is evident in those who are used to this metal, who
will frequently distinguish true from counterfeit, pure from adulterate, by
the sight, where others (who have as good eyes, but yet by use have not got
the precise nice idea of that peculiar yellow) shall not perceive any
difference. The like may be said of those other simple ideas, peculiar in
their kind to any substance; for which precise ideas there are no peculiar
names. The particular ringing sound there is in gold, distinct from the sound
of other bodies, has no particular name annexed to it, no more than the
particular yellow that belongs to that metal.
22. The Ideas of the powers of substances are best known by definition. But
because many of the simple ideas that make up our specific ideas of
substances are powers which lie not obvious to our senses in the things as
they ordinarily appear; therefore, in the signification of our names of
substances, some part of the signification will be better made known by
enumerating those simple ideas, than by showing the substance itself. For,
he that to the yellow shining colour of gold, got by sight, shall, from my
enumerating them, have the ideas of great ductility, fusibility, fixedness, and
solubility in aqua regia, will have a perfecter idea of gold than he can have
by seeing a piece of gold, and thereby imprinting in his mind only its
obvious qualities. But if the formal constitution of this shining, heavy,
ductile thing, (from whence all these its properties flow), lay open to our
senses, as the formal constitution or essence of a triangle does, the
signification of the word gold might as easily be ascertained as that of
triangle.
23. A reflection on the knowledge of corporeal things possessed by spirits
separate from bodies. Hence we may take notice, how much the foundation
of all our knowledge of corporeal things lies in our senses. For how spirits,
separate from bodies, (whose knowledge and ideas of these things are
certainly much more perfect than ours), know them, we have no notion, no
idea at all. The whole extent of our knowledge or imagination reaches not
beyond our own ideas limited to our ways of perception. Though yet it be
not to be doubted that spirits of a higher rank than those immersed in
flesh may have as clear ideas of the radical constitution of substances as
we have of a triangle, and so perceive how all their properties and
operations flow from thence: but the manner how they come by that
knowledge exceeds our conceptions.
24. Ideas of substances must also be conformable to things. Fourthly, But,
though definitions will serve to explain the names of substances as they
stand for our ideas, yet they leave them not without great imperfection as
they stand for things. For our names of substances being not put barely for
our ideas, but being made use of ultimately to represent things, and so are
put in their place, their signification must agree with the truth of things as
well as with men’s ideas. And therefore, in substances, we are not always to
rest in the ordinary complex idea commonly received as the signification of
that word, but must go a little further, and inquire into the nature and
properties of the things themselves, and thereby perfect, as much as we
can, our ideas of their distinct species; or else learn them from such as are
used to that sort of things, and are experienced in them. For, since it is
intended their names should stand for such collections of simple ideas as
do really exist in things themselves, as well as for the complex idea in other
men’s minds, which in their ordinary acceptation they stand for, therefore,
to define their names right, natural history is to be inquired into, and their
properties are, with care and examination, to be found out. For it is not
enough, for the avoiding inconveniences in discourse and arguings about
natural bodies and substantial things, to have learned, from the propriety of
the language, the common, but confused, or very imperfect, idea to which
each word is applied, and to keep them to that idea in our use of them; but
we must, by acquainting ourselves with the history of that sort of things,
rectify and settle our complex idea belonging to each specific name; and in
discourse with others, (if we find them mistake us), we ought to tell what
the complex idea is that we make such a name stand for. This is the more
necessary to be done by all those who search after knowledge and
philosophical verity, in that children, being taught words, whilst they have
but imperfect notions of things, apply them at random, and without much
thinking, and seldom frame determined ideas to be signified by them.
Which custom (it being easy, and serving well enough for the ordinary
affairs of life and conversation) they are apt to continue when they are
men: and so begin at the wrong end, learning words first and perfectly, but
make the notions to which they apply those words afterwards very overtly.
By this means it comes to pass, that men speaking the language of their
country, i.e. according to grammar rules of that language, do yet speak very
improperly of things themselves; and, by their arguing one with another,
make but small progress in the discoveries of useful truths, and the
knowledge of things, as they are to be found in themselves, and not in our
imaginations; and it matters not much for the improvement of our
knowledge how they are called.
25. Not easy to be made so. It were therefore to be wished, That men
versed in physical inquiries, and acquainted with the several sorts of
natural bodies, would set down those simple ideas wherein they observe
the individuals of each sort constantly to agree. This would remedy a great
deal of that confusion which comes from several persons applying the
same name to a collection of a smaller or greater number of sensible
qualities, proportionably as they have been more or less acquainted with, or
accurate in examining, the qualities of any sort of things which come under
one denomination. But a dictionary of this sort, containing, as it were, a
natural history, requires too many hands as well as too much time, cost,
pains, and sagacity ever to be hoped for; and till that be done, we must
content ourselves with such definitions of the names of substances as
explain the sense men use them in. And it would be well, where there is
occasion, if they would afford us so much. This yet is not usually done; but
men talk to one another, and dispute in words, whose meaning is not
agreed between them, out of a mistake that the significations of common
words are certainly established, and the precise ideas they stand for
perfectly known; and that it is a shame to be ignorant of them. Both which
suppositions are false; no names of complex ideas having so settled
determined significations, that they are constantly used for the same
precise ideas. Nor is it a shame for a man not to have a certain knowledge
of anything, but by the necessary ways of attaining it; and so it is no
discredit not to know what precise idea any sound stands for in another
man’s mind, without he declare it to me by some other way than barely
using that sound, there being no other way, without such a declaration,
certainly to know it. Indeed the necessity of communication by language
brings men to an agreement in the signification of common words, within
some tolerable latitude, that may serve for ordinary conversation: and so a
man cannot be supposed wholly ignorant of the ideas which are annexed to
words by common use, in a language familiar to him. But common use
being but a very uncertain rule, which reduces itself at last to the ideas of
particular men, proves often but a very variable standard. But though such
a Dictionary as I have above mentioned will require too much time, cost,
and pains to be hoped for in this age; yet methinks it is not unreasonable
to propose, that words standing for things which are known and
distinguished by their outward shapes should be expressed by little
draughts and prints made of them. A vocabulary made after this fashion
would perhaps with more ease, and in less time, teach the true signification
of many terms, especially in languages of remote countries or ages, and
settle truer ideas in men’s minds of several things, whereof we read the
names in ancient authors, than all the large and laborious comments of
learned critics. Naturalists, that treat of plants and animals, have found the
benefit of this way: and he that has had occasion to consult them will have
reason to confess that he has a clearer idea of apium or ibex, from a little
print of that herb or beast, than he could have from a long definition of the
names of either of them. And so no doubt he would have of strigil and
sistrum, if, instead of currycomb and cymbal, (which are the English names
dictionaries render them by,) he could see stamped in the margin small
pictures of these instruments, as they were in use amongst the ancients.
Toga, tunica, pallium, are words easily translated by gown, coat, and cloak;
but we have thereby no more true ideas of the fashion of those habits
amongst the Romans, than we have of the faces of the tailors who made
them. Such things as these, which the eye distinguishes by their shapes,
would be best let into the mind by draughts made of them, and more
determine the signification of such words, than any other words set for
them, or made use of to define them. But this is only by the bye.
26. V. Fifth remedy: To use the same word constantly in the same sense.
Fifthly, If men will not be at the pains to declare the meaning of their
words, and definitions of their terms are not to be had, yet this is the least
that can be expected, that, in all discourses wherein one man pretends to
instruct or convince another, he should use the same word constantly in
the same sense. If this were done, (which nobody can refuse without great
disingenuity,) many of the books extant might be spared; many of the
controversies in dispute would be at an end; several of those great
volumes, swollen with ambiguous words, now used in one sense, and by
and by in another, would shrink into a very narrow compass; and many of
the philosophers, (to mention no other) as well as poets works, might be
contained in a nutshell.


35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT VIII, DIV 62-63 478b-d
62. It might reasonably be expected in questions which have been
canvassed and disputed with great eagerness, since the first origin of
science and philosophy, that the meaning of all the terms, at least, should
have been agreed upon among the disputants; and our enquiries, in the
course of two thousand years, been able to pass from words to the true
and real subject of the controversy. For how easy may it seem to give exact
definitions of the terms employed in reasoning, and make these definitions,
not the mere sound of words, the object of future scrutiny and
examination? But if we consider the matter more narrowly, we shall be apt
to draw a quite opposite conclusion. From this circumstance alone, that a
controversy has been long kept on foot, and remains still undecided, we
may presume that there is some ambiguity in the expression, and that the
disputants affix different ideas to the terms employed in the controversy.
For as the faculties of the mind are supposed to be naturally alike in every
individual; otherwise nothing could be more fruitless than to reason or
dispute together; it were impossible, if men affix the same ideas to their
terms, that they could so long form different opinions of the same subject;
especially when they communicate their views, and each party turn
themselves on all sides, in search of arguments which may give them the
victory over their antagonists. It is true, if men attempt the discussion of
questions which lie entirely beyond the reach of human capacity, such as
those concerning the origin of worlds, or the economy of the intellectual
system or region of spirits, they may long beat the air in their fruitless
contests, and never arrive at any determinate conclusion. But if the
question regard any subject of common life and experience, nothing, one
would think, could preserve the dispute so long undecided but some
ambiguous expressions, which keep the antagonists still at a distance, and
hinder them from grappling with each other.
63. This has been the case in the long disputed question concerning liberty
and necessity; and to so remarkable a degree that, if I be not much
mistaken, we shall find, that all mankind, both learned and ignorant, have
always been of the same opinion with regard to this subject, and that a few
intelligible definitions would immediately have put an end to the whole
controversy. I own that this dispute has been so much canvassed on all
hands, and has led philosophers into such a labyrinth of obscure sophistry,
that it is no wonder, if a sensible reader indulge his ease so far as to turn a
deaf ear to the proposal of such a question, from which he can expect
neither instruction or entertainment. But the state of the argument here
proposed may, perhaps, serve to renew his attention; as it has more novelty,
promises at least some decision of the controversy, and will not much
disturb his ease by any intricate or obscure reasoning.
I hope, therefore, to make it appear that all men have ever agreed in the
doctrine both of necessity and of liberty, according to any reasonable
sense, which can be put on these terms; and that the whole controversy
has hitherto turned merely upon words. We shall begin with examining the
doctrine of necessity.


36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 307b-308b
                                 Chapter 30

——“All is not gain that is got into the purse.”——So that not with standing
my father had the happiness of reading the oldest books in the universe,
and had moreover, in himself, the oddest way of thinking that ever man in it
was blessed with, yet it had this drawback upon him after all—that it laid
him open to some of the oddest and most whimsical distresses; of which
this particular one, which he sunk under at present, is as strong an example
as can be given.
No doubt, the breaking down of the bridge of a child’s nose, by the edge of
a pair of forceps—however scientifically applied—would vex any man in the
world, who was at so much pains in begetting a child, as my father
was—yet it will not account for the extravagance of his affliction, nor will it
justify the unchristian manner he abandoned and surrendered himself up
to.
To explain this, I must leave him upon the bed for half an hour—and my
uncle Toby in his old fringe chair sitting beside him.

                                 Chapter 31

——I think it a very unreasonable demand—cried my great-grandfather,
twisting up the paper, and throwing it upon the table.——By this account,
madam, you have but two thousand pounds fortune, and not a shilling
more—and you insist upon having three hundred pounds a year jointure for
it.——
——“Because,” replied my great-grandmother, “you have little or no nose,
Sir.”——
Now before I venture to make use of the word Nose a second time—to
avoid all confusion in what will be said upon it, in this interesting part of
my story, it may not be amiss to explain my own meaning, and define, with
all possible exactness and precision, what I would willingly be understood
to mean by the term: being of opinion, that ’tis owing to the negligence and
perverseness of writers in despising this precaution, and to nothing
else—that all the polemical writings in divinity are not as clear and
demonstrative as those upon a Will o’ the Wisp, or any other sound part of
philosophy, and nature pursuit; in order to which, what have you to do,
before you set out, unless you intend to go puzzling on to the day of
judgment—but to give the world a good definition, and stand to it, of the
main word you have most occasion for—changing it, Sir, as you would a
guinea, into small coin?—which done— let the father of confusion puzzle
you, if he can; or put a different idea either into your head, or your reader’s
head, if he knows how.
In books of strict morality and close reasoning, such as this I am engaged
in—the neglect is inexcusable; and Heaven is witness, how the world has
revenged itself upon me for leaving so many openings to equivocal
strictures—and for depending so much as I have done, all along, upon the
cleanliness of my readers’ imaginations.
——Here are two senses, cried Eugenius, as we walked along, pointing with
the fore finger of his right hand to the word Crevice, in the one hundred
and seventy-eighth page of the first volume of this book of books;—here
are two senses—quoth he—And here are two roads, replied I, turning short
upon him—a dirty and a clean one—which shall we take?——The clean, by
all means, replied Eugenius. Eugenius, said I, stepping before him, and
laying my hand upon his breast—to define—is to distrust.—Thus I triumphed
over Eugenius; but I triumphed over him as I always do, like a fool.——’Tis
my comfort, however, I am not an obstinate one: therefore
I define a nose as follows—intreating only beforehand, and beseeching my
readers, both male and female, of what age, complexion, and condition
soever, for the love of God and their own souls, to guard against the
temptations and suggestions of the devil, and suffer him by no art or wile
to put any other ideas into their minds, than what I put into my
definition—For by the word Nose, throughout all this long chapter of noses,
and in every other part of my work, where the word Nose occurs—I declare,
by that word I mean a nose, and nothing more, or less.

                                 Chapter 32
——“Because,” quoth my great-grandmother, repeating the words
again—“you have little or no nose, Sir.”——
’Sdeath! cried my great-grandfather, clapping his hand upon his nose,—’tis
not so small as that comes to;—’tis a full inch longer than my
father’s.——Now, my great-grandfather’s nose was for all the world like unto
the noses of all the men, women, and children, whom Pantagruel found
dwelling upon the island of Ennasin.——By the way, if you would know the
strange way of getting a-kin amongst so flat-nosed a people—you must
read the book;—find it out yourself, you never can.——
