6a. The symbolism of dreams: their latent and manifest content
4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK XIX [509-581] 294c-295a,c
5 AESCHYLUS: Persians [176-230] 17a-c / Choephoroe [523-552] 75b-c
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the King [977-982)108b
5 EURIPIDES: Iphigenia Among the Tauri [42-66] 411c-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK I, 25b-d; 28c-29a; 47a-c; BK II, 78d; BK VII, 218b-220b esp 
219a-c
7 PLATO: Crito, 213b-d / Phaedo, 221d-222a
8 ARISTOTLE: Prophesying 707a-709a,c esp CH 2 [464ᵇ7-18] 709c
14 PLUTARCH: Pvrrhus, 329c-d / Cimon, 398d- 399b / Eumenes, 473a-b / Alexander, 548d-549a 
/ Demosthenes, 702c-703b / Demetrius, 727b-d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, IX [13-69] 66a-c; XIX [1-63] 81c-82a; XXVII [91-108] 
95c
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK V, STANZA 52-55 127a-b; STANZA 177-186 143b-144b; 
STANZA 207-219 147a-149a; STANZA 245 152a / Nun's Priest's Tale [14,898-15,162] 451a- 455b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 533d-534a
26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry VI, ACT I, SC II [17-55] 36c-37a / Richard III, ACT I, SC IV 
[1-74] 114d-115b / Romeo and Juliet, ACT I, SC IV [49-103] 291a-c / Midsummer-Night's 
Dream, ACT II, SC II [145-156] 360b-c / Julius Caesar, ACT II, SC II [58-107] 578d-579b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Macbeth, ACT V, SC I 306b- 307a / Cymbeline, ACT V, SC IV [30-150] 481c- 
482c; SC V [426-485] 488b-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK V [28-128] 176a-178a esp [100-109] 177b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 263d-265c
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dick, 19a-20a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK II, 86a; BK VI, 249a-250a; BK XI, 481a-482a; BK XII, 
561b-562a; BK XIV, 608a-b; EPILOGUE I, 673d- 674a,c
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 11a-13a esp 11d-12c / Interpretation 
of Dreams, 173a-174d; 178a-205c esp 178a- 179c, 189b-190a, 194b-d, 197b-198d, 204c-d; 
230b-231c; 252c-340a esp 252c-253a, 264c- 272c, 282a-285b,332a-333b,339b-340a;356d- 373a 
passim / General Introduction, 476a-478b; 489c-494d esp 492d-493c; 504d-526c esp 
504d-506c, 518d-519d; 539c-544d esp 539c- 540a, 541b / New Introductory Lectures, 808d- 
817a esp 809b, 810b-d, 812d, 813d-814b


6a. The symbolism of dreams: their latent and manifest content
4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK XIX [509-581] 294c-295a,c
[509] "Stranger, I should like to speak with you briefly about another matter. It is 
indeed nearly bed time—for those, at least, who can sleep in spite of sorrow. As for 
myself, heaven has given me a life of such unmeasurable woe, that even by day when I am 
attending to my duties and looking after the servants, I am still weeping and lamenting 
during the whole time; then, when night comes, and we all of us go to bed, I lie awake 
thinking, and my heart becomes a prey to the most incessant and cruel tortures. As the 
dun nightingale, daughter of Pandareus, sings in the early spring from her seat in 
shadiest covert hid, and with many a plaintive trill pours out the tale how by mishap she 
killed her own child Itylus, son of king Zethus, even so does my mind toss and turn in 
its uncertainty whether I ought to stay with my son here, and safeguard my substance, my 
bondsmen, and the greatness of my house, out of regard to public opinion and the memory 
of my late husband, or whether it is not now time for me to go with the best of these 
suitors who are wooing me and making me such magnificent presents. As long as my son was 
still young, and unable to understand, he would not hear of my leaving my husband's 
house, but now that he is full grown he begs and prays me to do so, being incensed at the 
way in which the suitors are eating up his property. Listen, then, to a dream that I have 
had and interpret it for me if you can. I have twenty geese about the house that eat mash 
out of a trough, and of which I am exceedingly fond. I dreamed that a great eagle came 
swooping down from a mountain, and dug his curved beak into the neck of each of them till 
he had killed them all. Presently he soared off into the sky, and left them lying dead 
about the yard; whereon I wept in my dream till all my maids gathered round me, so 
piteously was I grieving because the eagle had killed my geese. Then he came back again, 
and perching on a projecting rafter spoke to me with human voice, and told me to leave 
off crying. 'Be of good courage,' he said, 'daughter of Icarius; this is no dream, but a 
vision of good omen that shall surely come to pass. The geese are the suitors, and I am 
no longer an eagle, but your own husband, who am come back to you, and who will bring 
these suitors to a disgraceful end.' On this I woke, and when I looked out I saw my geese 
at the trough eating their mash as usual."
[554] 'This dream, Madam," replied Ulysses, "can admit but of one interpretation, for had 
not Ulysses himself told you how it shall be fulfilled? The death of the suitors is 
portended, and not one single one of them will escape."
[559] And Penelope answered, "Stranger, dreams are very curious and unaccountable things, 
and they do not by any means invariably come true. There are two gates through which 
these unsubstantial fancies proceed; the one is of horn, and the other ivory. Those that 
come through the gate of ivory are fatuous, but those from the gate of horn mean 
something to those that see them. I do not think, however, that my own dream came through 
the gate of horn, though I and my son should be most thankful if it proves to have done 
so. Furthermore I say—and lay my saying to your heart— the coming dawn will usher in 
the ill-omened day that is to sever me from the house of Ulysses, for I am about to hold 
a tournament of axes. My husband used to set up twelve axes in the court, one in front of 
the other, like the stays upon which a ship is built; he would then go back from them and 
shoot an arrow through the whole twelve. I shall make the suitors try to do the same 
thing, and whichever of them can string the bow most easily, and send his arrow through 
all the twelve axes, him will I follow, and quit this house of my lawful husband, so 
goodly and so abounding in wealth. But even so, I doubt not that I shall remember it in 
my dreams."











5 AESCHYLUS: Persians [176-230] 17a-c / Choephoroe [523-552] 75b-c
5 AESCHYLUS: Persians [176-230] 17a-c
Ch. Be sure of this, Queen of this land of ours,
There never was nor ever can be need
To ask us twice for help by word or deed,
So far as ripe experience empowers
Leal hearts to proffer guidance: in our breast
There is no thought save how to serve thee best.

At. I am much conversant with dreams at night
Since with his army my dear son is gone
To ravage and lay waste Ionia,
But nothing yet so startlingly distinct
As yesternight, as you shall forthwith hear.
For there appeared to me in bright apparel
Two women; one with Persian robes adorned,
The other in the Dorian garb; and each
Taller in stature than are women now,
Faultlessly fair, both sisters of one house.
The first in Hellas dwelt, by sortilege
Assigned; the other lived in Barbary.
And so it was, that in my dream methought
There was some kind of quarrel 'twixt the twain,
Which, when my dear son was apprised of it,
He would compose and make them live as friends.
And so he harnessed them to a chariot
Lashing their necks to the yoke. And the tall form
Clad in our raiment answered to the rein;
But the other struggled; tore the tackle up
And without bit or bridle breaking loose
Snapped the strong yoke asunder. My son fell;
And suddenly his father stood beside him,
Even Darius, sorry for his fall.
This is the vision I beheld last night.
But when I rose and in fair-flowing stream
Had washed my hands, so cleansed for sacrifice
I stood before an altar, purposing
To make my offering of the elements
To the Divine Forfenders, whose indeed
The office is. And, lo, an eagle fled
To Phoebus' burning brazier! Good my friends,
When I saw that I was struck dumb with fear.
And presently a falcon flew at him,
Beat him about the body with its wings,
And with its claws his proud crest-feathers
plucked.
And strange—and passing strange—the eagle
quailed
Nor dared at all retaliate. What I saw
Filled me with dread and will affright your ears.
Well do ye know that if our son succeed
He will become the wonder of the world
;
And even if he fail, there is no law
Can call him to account; but unimpaired,
Life granted him, his throne is o'er this land.

Ch. Mother, we would not by aught we might say
Alarm unduly or raise hopes too high.
Better approach the gods, better go pray,
If shapes of ugly seeming haunt thine eye.
Beseech them to deliver thee from ill,
And for thyself, thy children and the State
And all thou lovest good things to fulfil.
This done, with drink-offerings propitiate
Earth and the dead; and then entreat thy spouse,
Darius, whom thou say'st that yesternight
Thou did'st behold, for thee and for thy house
Up from the underworld into the light
To send good luck, and adverse things blindfold
Muffle in nether darkness. Not untaught
By my prophetic soul have I made bold
To speak, convinced so best may good be sought.
At. Well, come what may, my dream hath found
in thee

5 AESCHYLUS: Choephoroe [523-552] 75b-c
Ch. Son, I was there; she was so shook with
dreams
And terrors of the night, her wicked heart
So scared, she tremblingly despatched these cups.
Or. Told she her dream ?
Ch. Shedid;"Methought"
she cried
"I was delivered of a viper!"
Or. Well,
Finish thy story.
Ch. Then, as 'twere a child,
She hushed and wrapped it up in cradle-clothes.
Or. And what meat craved the dragon-worm
new hatched ?
Ch. She gave it her own breast, ay, in her dream.
Or. Did she so? Then I warrant her paps are sore.
Ch. It milked her, and sucked out the curded
blood.
Or. There was a meaning in this vision.
Ch. She cried in her sleep and started broad
awake.

And all the palace-lamps, that hung blind-eyed
In darkness, blazed up for the mistress' sake.
And, presently, she sends these loving-cups;
She thinks them surgery for distempered thoughts.

Or. O parent earth, sepulchre of my father,
Answer my prayer and make this dream come true!
In my interpretation all coheres.
For, look you, if the asp came whence I came,
If it was wound in swaddling clothes, and gaped
With mumbling mouth about the breast that
nursed me,
And mingled mother-milk with curded blood,
By this, and by her shriek that saw the dream,
Then, as she gave suck to a devilish thing,
She dies in her blood ; and I am dragon-fanged
To kill her as the dream would have me do.
Ch. Oh, good ; your reading of it contents me well;

And Heaven fulfil it; but give us first some clew:
Which shall be actors here and who look on.
Or. In sooth, a simple story : she must within,

And it shall be your charge to cloak my plot.
So, as their treason slew a royal man,
They may be tricked and the same noose they rove
Strangle themselves, even as Loxias spake,
Apollo, Prince and Prophet ne'er found false.
My guise a traveller, all my traps complete,
With Pylades here I'll to the palace-gates,
As a friend of the house— trustv—oh, true as steel!
And he and I will talk Parnassian,
Mimic the parle of Phocis for the nonce.
'Tis like enough their varlets will not smile
A welcome, there's such devilment within.
No matter; we will wait; and passers-by
Will say "How comes it /^gisthus denies
A stranger, if he be not gone abroad ?"
But once across the threshold of the court,
And if I find him on my father's throne,
Or he come anon and look me in the face,
Hell gapes for him, down drop his dastard eyes,
Ere he can quaver "What's your country?" I
Will spit him on my sword a carcase for crows.
And then Erinys, that stints not her cups,
Shall quaff full healths of slaughter unallayed.
Go, sister; have an eye to all within,
That nothing in our business go agley.
(To the chorus)

And see that ye offend not with your tongue;
Speak, or say nothing, as occasion serves.
(To pylades)

Hither to me: second me with thine eye;
Put mettle in my heart and point my sword.
Exeunt orestes and pylades.


5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the King [977-982)108b
Io. Nay, did I not so foretell to thee long since ?
Oed. Thou didst: but I was misled by my fear.
Io. Now no more lay aught of those things to
heart.
Oed. But surelv I must needs fear mv mother's
bed?

Io. Nay, what should mortal fear, for whom the
decrees of fortune are supreme, and who hath clear
foresight of nothing? 'Tis best to live at random, as
one may. But fear not thou touching wedlock with
thy mother. Many men ere now have so fared in
dreams also: but he to whom these things are as
nought bears his life most easily.

Oed. All these bold words of thine would have been
well, were not my mother living; but as it is, since
she lives, I must needs fear— though thou sayest well.
Io. Howbeit thy father's death is a great sign to
cheer us.

Oed. Great, I know ; but my fear is of her who lives.
Me. And who is the woman about whom ye fear?
Oed. Merope, old man, the consort of Polybus.
Me. And what is it in her that moves your fear?
Oed. A heaven-sent oracle of dread import,
stranger.

Me. Lawful, or unlawful, for another to know?
Oed. Lawful, surely. Loxias once said that I was
doomed to espouse mine own mother, and to shed
with mine own hands my father's blood. Wherefore
my home in Corinth was long kept by me afar;
with happy event, indeed—yet still 'tis sweet to see
the face of parents.











5 EURIPIDES: Iphigenia Among the Tauri [42-66] 411c-d
Strange visions the past night brought me, which I will tell to the air, if there is 
really any help in that. As I slept, methought I had escaped this land and was once more 
in Argos, sleeping in the midst of my maidens, when lo! the surface of the ground was 
shaken by an earthquake; whereat I fled, and, standing outside the house, I saw its 
coping falling and the whole building dashed in ruin from roof to base. Only one column, 
methought, of my father's halls was left standing, and from its capital it let stream the 
auburn hair and took a human tongue; and I, observant of the murderous craft I practise 
against strangers, began sprinkling it, as it had been a victim, weeping the while.
Now this is my interpretation of the dream: Orestes is dead; 'twas for him I began the 
rites; for son are the pillars of a house, and death is the lot of all whom once my 
lustral waters sprinkle. Again, I cannot fix the dream upon my friends, for Strophius had 
no son at the time I was called to die. Now therefore I mean to pour a drink-offering to 
my brother who is far from me here, for this I can do, with the help of the maidens from 
Hellas whom the king has given me as attendants. But wherefore are they not yet here? I 
will enter the courts of the goddess's temple, where I dwell.				
			 Exit iphigenia.
Enter orestes and pylades.
























6 HERODOTUS: History, BK I, 25b-d; 28c-29a; 47a-c; BK II, 78d; BK VII, 218b-220b esp 
219a-c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK I, 25b-d
107. Astyages, the son of Cyaxares, succeeded to the throne. He had a daughter who was 
named Mandane concerning whom he had a wonderful dream. He dreamt that from her such a 
stream of water flowed forth as not only to fill his capital, but to flood the whole of 
Asia. This vision he laid before such of the Magi as had the gift of interpreting dreams, 
who expounded its meaning to him in full, whereat he was greatly terrified. On this 
account, when his daughter was now of ripe age, he would not give her in marriage to any 
of the Medes who were of suitable rank, lest the dream should be accomplished; but he 
married her to a Persian of good family indeed, but of a quiet temper, whom he looked on 
as much inferior to a Mede of even middle condition.
108. Thus Cambyses (for so was the Persian called) wedded Mandane, and took her to his 
home, after which, in the very first year, Astyages saw another vision. He fancied that a 
vine grew from the womb of his daughter, and overshadowed the whole of Asia. After this 
dream, which he submitted also to the interpreters, he sent to Persia and fetched away 
Mandane, who was now with child, and was not far from her time. On her arrival he set a 
watch over her, intending to destroy the child to which she should give birth; for the 
Magian interpreters had expounded the vision to foreshow that the offspring of his 
daughter would reign over Asia in his stead. To guard against this, Astyages, as soon as 
Cyrus was born, sent for Harpagus, a man of his own house and the most faithful of the 
Medes, to whom he was wont to entrust all his affairs, and addressed him 
thus—"Harpagus, I beseech thee neglect not the business with which I am about to charge 
thee; neither betray thou the interests of thy lord for others' sake, lest thou bring 
destruction on thine own head at some future time. Take the child born of Mandane my 
daughter; carry him with thee to thy home and slay him there. Then bury him as thou 
wilt." "Oh! king," replied the other, "never in time past did Harpagus disoblige thee in 
anything, and be sure that through all future time he will be careful in nothing to 
offend. If therefore it be thy will that this thing be done, it is for me to serve thee 
with all diligence."
109. When Harpagus had thus answered, the child was given into his hands, clothed in the 
garb of death, and he hastened weeping to his home. There on his arrival he found his 
wife, to whom he told all that Astyages had said. "What then," said she, "is it now in 
thy heart to do?" "Not what Astyages requires," he answered; "no, he may be madder and 
more frantic still than he is now, but I will not be the man to work his will, or lend a 
helping hand to such a murder as this. Many things forbid my slaying him. In the first 
place the boy is my own kith and kin; and next Astyages is old, and has no son. If then 
when he dies the crown should go to his daughter—that daughter whose child he now 
wishes to slay by my hand—what remains for me but danger of the fearfullest kind? For 
my own safety, indeed, the child must die; but some one belonging to Astyages must take 
his life, not I or mine."

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK I, 28c-29a
120. Such was the mode in which Astyages punished Harpagus: afterwards, proceeding to ; 
consider what he should do with Cyrus, his grandchild, he sent for the Magi, who formerly 
interpreted his dream in the way which alarmed him so much, and asked them how they had 
expounded it. They answered, without varying from what they had said before,  that "the 
boy must needs be a king if he grew , up, and did not die too soon." Then Astyages 
addressed them thus: "The boy has escaped, and lives; he has been brought up in the 
country, and the lads of the village where he lives have made him their king. All that 
kings commonly do he has done. He has had his guards, and his doorkeepers, and his 
messengers, and all the other usual officers. Tell me, then, to to what, think you, does 
all this tend ? " The Magi I answered, "If the boy survives, and has ruled j as a king 
without any craft or contrivance, in I that case we bid thee cheer up, and feel no  more 
alarm on his account. He will not reign a second time. For we have found even oracles 
sometimes fulfilled in an unimportant way; and dreams, still oftener, have wondrously 
mean accomplishments." "It is what I my. I self most incline to think," Astyages 
rejoined;  "the boy having been already king, the dream j is out, and I have nothing more 
to fear from I him. Nevertheless, take good heed and counsel I me the best you can for 
the safety of my house and your own interests." "Truly," said the Magi in reply, "it very 
much concerns our interests that thy kingdom be firmly established; for if it went to 
this boy it would pass into foreign hands, since he is a Persian: and then we  Medes 
should lose our freedom, and be quite I despised by the Persians, as being foreigners.  
But so long as thou, our fellow-countryman,  art on the throne, all manner of honours are 
ours, and we are even not without some share ! in the government. Much reason therefore 
have we to forecast well for thee and for thy sovereignty. If then we saw any cause for 
present fear, be sure we would not keep it back from thee. But truly we are persuaded 
that the dream has had its accomplishment in this H harmless way; and so our own fears 
being at rest, we recommend thee to banish thine. As for the boy, our advice is that thou 
send him away to Persia, to his father and mother."
121. Astyages heard their answer with pleasure, and calling Cyrus into his presence, said 
to him, "My child, I was led to do thee a wrong by a dream which has come to nothing: 
from that wrong thou wert saved by thy own good fortune. Go now with a light heart to 
Persia; I will provide thy escort. Go, and when thou gettest to thy journey's end, thou 
wilt behold thy father and thy mother, quite other people from Mitradates the cowherd and 
his wife."
122. With these words Astyages dismissed his grandchild. On his arrival at the house of 
Cambyses, he was received by his parents, who, when they learnt who he was, embraced him 
heartily, having always been convinced that he died almost as soon as he was born. So 
they asked him by what means he had chanced to escape; and he told them how that till 
lately he had known nothing at all about the matter, but had been mistaken—oh! so 
widely!—and how that he had learnt his history by the way, as he came from Media. He 
had been quite sure that he was the son of the king's cowherd, but on the road the king's 
escort had told him all the truth; and then he spoke of the cowherd's wife who had 
brought him up, and filled his whole talk with her praises; in all that he had to tell 
them about himself, it was always Cyno—Cyno was everything. So it happened that his 
parents, catching the name at his mouth, and wishing to persuade the Persians that there 
was a special providence in his preservation, spread the report that Cyrus, when he was 
exposed, was suckled by a bitch. This was the sole origin of the rumour.

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK I, 47a-c
209. The first night after the passage, as he  slept in the enemy's country, a vision 
appeared to him. He seemed to see in his sleep the eldest of the sons of Hystaspes, with 
wings upon his shoulders, shadowing with the one wing Asia, and Europe with the other. 
Now Hystaspes, the son of Arsames, was of the race of the Achaemenidae, and his eldest 
son, Darius, was at that time scarce twenty years old; wherefore, not being of age to go 
to the wars, he had remained behind in Persia. When Cyrus woke from his sleep, and turned 
the vision over in his mind, it seemed to him no light matter. He therefore sent for 
Hystaspes, and taking him aside said, "Hystaspes, thy son is discovered to be plotting 
against me and my crown. I will tell thee how I know it so certainly. The gods watch over 
my safety, and warn me beforehand of every danger. Now last night, as I lay in my bed, I 
saw in a vision the eldest of thy sons with wings upon his shoulders, shadowing with the 
one wing Asia, and Europe with the other. From this it is certain, beyond all possible 
doubt, that he is engaged in some plot against me. Return thou then at once to Persia, 
and be sure, when I come back from conquering the Massagetae, to have thy son ready to 
produce before me, that I may examine him."
210. Thus Cyrus spoke, in the belief that he was plotted against by Darius; but he missed 
the true meaning of the dream, which was sent by God to forewarn him, that he was to die 
then and there, and that his kingdom was to fall at last to Darius.
Hystaspes made answer to Cyrus in these; words:—"Heaven forbid, sire, that there should 
be a Persian living who would plot against thee! If such an one there be, may a speedy 
death overtake him! Thou foundest the Persians a race of slaves, thou hast made them free 
men: thou foundest them subject to others, thou hast made them lords of all. If a vision 
has announced that my son is practising against thee, lo, I resign him into thy hands to 
deal with as thou wilt." Hystaspes, when he had thus answered, recrossed the Araxes and 
hastened hastened
back to Persia, to keep a watch on his
son Darius.
211. Meanwhile Cyrus, having advanced a day's march from the river, did as Craesus had 
advised him, and, leaving the worthless portion of his army in the camp, drew of? with 
his good troops towards the river. Soon afterwards, a detachment of the Massagetae, one 
third of their entire army, led by Spargapises, son of the queen Tomyris, coming up, fell 
upon the body which had been left behind by Cyrus, and on their resistance put them to 
the sword. Then, seeing the banquet prepared, they sat down and began to feast. When they 
had eaten and drunk their fill, and were now sunk in sleep, the Persians under Cyrus 
arrived, slaughtered a great multitude, and made even a larger number prisoners. Among 
these last was Spargapises himself.
212. When Tomyris heard what had befallen her son and her army, she sent a herald to 
Cyrus, who thus addressed the conqueror:— "Thou bloodthirsty Cyrus, pride not thyself 
on this poor success: it was the grape-juice which, when ye drink it, makes you so mad, 
and as ye swallow it down brings up to your lips such bold and wicked words—it was this 
poison wherewith thou didst ensnare my child, and so overcamest him, not in fair open 
fight. Now hearken what I advise, and be sure I advise thee for thy good. Restore my son 
to me and get thee from the land unharmed, triumphant over a third part of the host of 
the Massagetae. Refuse, and I swear by the sun, the sovereign lord of the Massagetae, 
bloodthirsty as thou art, I will give thee thy fill of blood."

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 78d
139. The Ethiopian finally quitted Egypt, the priests said, by a hasty flight under the 
following circumstances. He saw in his sleep a vision:—a man stood by his side, and 
counselled him to gather together all the priests of Egypt and cut every one of them 
asunder. On this, according to the account which he himself gave, it came into his mind 
that the gods intended hereby to lead him to commit an act of sacrilege, which would be 
sure to draw down upon him some punishment either at the hands of gods or men. So he 
resolved not to do the deed suggested to him, but rather to retire from Egypt, as the 
time during which it was fated that he should hold the country had now (he thought) 
expired. For before he left Ethiopia he had been told by the oracles which are venerated 
there, that he was to reign fifty years over Egypt. The years were now fled, and the 
dream had come to trouble him; he therefore of his own accord withdrew from the land.
140. As soon as Sabacos was gone, the blind king left the marshes, and resumed the 
government. He had lived in the marsh-region the whole time, having formed for himself an 
island there by a mixture of earth and ashes. While he remained, the natives had orders 
to bring him food unbeknown to the Ethiopian, and latterly, at his request, each man had 
brought him, with the food, a certain quantity of ashes. Before Amyrtasus, no one was 
able to discover the site of this island, which continued unknown to the kings of Egypt 
who preceded him on the throne for the space of seven hundred years and more. The name 
which it bears is Elbo. It is about ten furlongs across in each direction.

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK VII, 218b-220b
12. Thus far did the speaking proceed. Afterwards evening fell; and Xerxes began to find 
the advice of Artabanus greatly disquiet him. So he thought upon it during the night, and 
concluded at last that it was not for his advantage to lead an army into Greece. When he 
had thus made up his mind anew, he fell asleep. And now he saw in the night, as the 
Persians declare, a vision of this nature—he thought a tall and beautiful man stood 
over him and said, "Hast thou then changed thy mind, Persian, and wilt thou not lead 
forth thy host against the Greeks, after commanding the Persians to gather together their 
levies? Be sure thou doest not well to change; nor is there a man here who will approve 
thy conduct. The course that thou didst determine on during the day, let that be 
followed." After thus speaking the man seemed to Xerxes to fly away.
13. Day dawned; and the king made no account of this dream, but called together the same 
Persians as before, and spake to them as follows:—
"Men of Persia, forgive me if I alter the resolve to which I came so lately. Consider 
that I have not yet reached to the full growth of my wisdom, and that they who urge me to 
engage in this war leave me not to myself for a moment. When I heard the advice of 
Artabanus,  my young blood suddenly boiled; and I spake words against him little 
befitting his years: now however I confess my fault, and am resolved to follow his 
counsel. Understand then that I have changed my intent with respect to carrying war into 
Greece, and cease to trouble yourselves." 
When they heard these words, the Persians were full of joy, and, falling down at the feet 
of Xerxes, made obeisance to him.
14. But when night came, again the same vision stood over Xerxes as he slept, and said, 
"Son of Darius, it seems thou hast openly before all the Persians renounced the 
expedition, making light of my words, as though thou hadst not heard them spoken. Know 
therefore and be well assured, that unless thou go forth to the war, this thing shall 
happen unto thee —as thou art grown mighty and puissant in a short space, so likewise 
shalt thou within a little time be brought low indeed."
15. Then Xerxes, greatly frightened at the vision which he had seen, sprang from his 
couch, and sent a messenger to call Artabanus, who came at the summons, when Xerxes spoke 
to him in these words:—
"Artabanus, at the moment I acted foolishly, when I gave thee ill words in return for thy 
good advice. However it was not long ere I repented, and was convinced that thy counsel 
was such as I ought to follow. But I may not now act in this way, greatly as I desire to 
do so. For ever since I repented and changed my mind a dream has haunted me, which 
disapproves my intentions, and has now just gone from me with threats. Now if this dream 
is sent to me from God, and if it is indeed his will that our troops should march against 
Greece, thou too wilt have the same dream come to thee and receive the same commands as 
myself. And this will be most sure to happen, I think, if thou puttest on the dress which 
I am wont to wear, and then, after taking thy seat upon my throne, liest down to sleep on 
my bed."
16. Such were the words of Xerxes. Artabanus would not at first yield to the command of 
the king; for he deemed himself unworthy to sit upon the royal throne. At the last 
however he was forced to give way, and did as Xerxes bade him; but first he spake thus to 
the king [§ i.]:—
"To me, sire, it seems to matter little whether a man is wise himself or willing to 
hearken to such as give good advice. In thee truly are found both tempers; but the 
counsels of evil men lead thee astray: they are like the gales of wind which vex the 
sea—else the most useful thing for man in the whole world—and suffer it not to follow 
the bent of its own nature. For myself, it irked me not so much to be reproached by thee, 
as to observe that when two courses were placed before the Persian people, one of a 
nature to increase their pride, the other to humble it, by showing them how hurtful it is 
to allow one's heart always to covet more than one at present possesses, thou madest 
choice of that which was the worse both for thyself and for the Persians. (§ 2.) Now 
thou sayest that from the time when thou didst approve the better course, and give up the 
thought of warring against Greece, a dream has haunted thee, sent by some god or other, 
which will not suffer thee to lay aside the expedition. But such things, my son, have of 
a truth nothing divine in them. The dreams that wander to and fro among mankind, I will 
tell thee of what nature they are—I who have seen so many more years than thou. 
Whatever a man has been thinking of during the day is wont to hover round him in the 
visions of his dreams at night. Now we during these many days past have had our hands 
full of this enterprise. (§ 3.) If however the matter be not as I suppose, but God has 
indeed some part therein, thou hast in brief declared the whole that can be said 
concerning it—let it e'en appear to me as it has to thee, and lay on me the same 
injunctions. But it ought not to appear to me any the more if I put on thy clothes than 
if I wear my own, nor if I go to sleep in thy bed than if I do so in mine—supposing, I 
mean, that it is about to appear at all. For this thing, be it what it may, that visits 
thee in thy sleep, surely is not so far gone in folly as to see me, and because I am 
dressed in thy clothes, straightway to mistake me for thee. Now however our business is 
to see if it will regard me as of small account, and not vouchsafe to appear to me, 
whether I wear mine own clothes or thine, while it keeps on haunting thee continually. If 
it does so, and appears often, I should myself say that it was from God. For the rest, if 
thy mind is fixed, and it is not possible to turn thee from thy design, but I must needs 
go and sleep in thy bed, well and good, let it be even so; and when I have done as thou 
wishest, then let the dream appear to me. Till such time, however, I shall keep to my 
former opinion."
17. Thus spake Artabanus; and when he had so said, thinking to show Xerxes that his words 
were nought, he did according to his orders. Having put on the garments which Xerxes was 
wont to wear and taken his seat upon the royal throne, he lay down to sleep upon the 
king's own bed. As he slept, there appeared to him the very same dream which had been 
seen by Xerxes; it came and stood over Artabanus, and said:—
"Thou art the man, then, who, feigning to be tender of Xerxes, seekest to dissuade him 
from leading his armies against the Greeks! But thou shalt not escape scathless, either 
now or in time to come, because thou hast sought to prevent that which is fated to 
happen. As for Xerxes, it has been plainly told to himself what will befall him, if he 
refuses to perform my bidding."
18. In such words, as Artabanus thought, the vision threatened him, and then endeavoured 
to burn out his eyes with red-hot irons. At this he shrieked, and, leaping from his 
couch, hurried to Xerxes, and, sitting down at his side, gave him a full account of the 
vision; after which he went on to speak in the words which follow:—
"I, O King! am a man who have seen many mighty empires overthrown by weaker ones; and 
therefore it was that I sought to hinder thee from being quite carried away by thy youth; 
since I knew how evil a thing it is to covet more than one possesses. I could remember 
the expedition of Cyrus against the Massagetae, and what was the issue of it; I could 
recollect the march of Cambyses against the Ethiops; I had taken part in the attack of 
Darius upon the Scyths—bearing therefore all these things in mind, I thought with 
myself that if thou shouldst remain at peace, all men would deem thee fortunate. But as 
this impulse has plainly come from above, heaven-sent destruction seems about to overtake 
the Greeks, behold, I change to another mind, and alter my thoughts upon the matter. Do 
thou therefore make known to the Persians what the god has declared, and bid them follow 
the orders which were first given, and prepare their levies. Be careful to act so that 
the bounty of the god may not be hindered by slackness on thy part."
Thus spake these two together; and Xerxes, being in good heart on account of the vision, 
when day broke, laid all before the Persians; while Artabanus, who had formerly been the 
only person openly to oppose the expedition, now showed as openly that he favoured it. 
19. After Xerxes had thus determined to go forth to the war, there appeared to him in his 
sleep yet a third vision. The Magi were consulted upon it, and said that its meaning 
reached to the whole earth, and that all mankind would become his servants. Now the 
vision which the king saw was this: he dreamt that he was crowned with a branch of an 
olive tree, and that boughs spread out from the olive branch and covered the whole earth; 
then suddenly the garland, as it lay upon his brow, vanished. So when the Magi had thus 
interpreted the vision, straightway all the Persians who were come together departed to 
their several governments, where each displayed the greatest zeal, on the faith of the 
king's offers. For all hoped to obtain for themselves the gifts which had been promised. 
And so Xerxes gathered together his host, ransacking every corner of the continent.
20. Reckoning from the recovery of Egypt, Xerxes spent four full years in collecting his 
host, and making ready all things that were needful for his soldiers. It was not till the 
close of the fifth year that he set forth on his march, accompanied by a mighty 
multitude. For of all the armaments whereof any mention has reached us, this was by far 
the greatest; insomuch that no other expedition compared to this seems of any account, 
neither that which Darius undertook against the Scythians, nor the expedition of the 
Scythians (which the attack of Darius was designed to avenge), when they, being in 
pursuit of the Cimmerians, fell upon the Median territory, and subdued and held for a 
time almost the whole of Upper Asia; nor, again, that of the Atridae against Troy, of 
which we hear in story; nor that of the Mysians and Teucrians, which was still earlier, 
wherein these nations crossed the Bosphorus into Europe, and, after conquering all 
Thrace, pressed forward till they came to the Ionian Sea, while southward they reached as 
far as the river Peneus.

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK VII, esp 219a-c
16. Such were the words of Xerxes. Artabanus would not at first yield to the command of 
the king; for he deemed himself unworthy to sit upon the royal throne. At the last 
however he was forced to give way, and did as Xerxes bade him; but first he spake thus to 
the king [§ i.]:—
"To me, sire, it seems to matter little whether a man is wise himself or willing to 
hearken to such as give good advice. In thee truly are found both tempers; but the 
counsels of evil men lead thee astray: they are like the gales of wind which vex the 
sea—else the most useful thing for man in the whole world—and suffer it not to follow 
the bent of its own nature. For myself, it irked me not so much to be reproached by thee, 
as to observe that when two courses were placed before the Persian people, one of a 
nature to increase their pride, the other to humble it, by showing them how hurtful it is 
to allow one's heart always to covet more than one at present possesses, thou madest 
choice of that which was the worse both for thyself and for the Persians. (§ 2.) Now 
thou sayest that from the time when thou didst approve the better course, and give up the 
thought of warring against Greece, a dream has haunted thee, sent by some god or other, 
which will not suffer thee to lay aside the expedition. But such things, my son, have of 
a truth nothing divine in them. The dreams that wander to and fro among mankind, I will 
tell thee of what nature they are—I who have seen so many more years than thou. 
Whatever a man has been thinking of during the day is wont to hover round him in the 
visions of his dreams at night. Now we during these many days past have had our hands 
full of this enterprise. (§ 3.) If however the matter be not as I suppose, but God has 
indeed some part therein, thou hast in brief declared the whole that can be said 
concerning it—let it e'en appear to me as it has to thee, and lay on me the same 
injunctions. But it ought not to appear to me any the more if I put on thy clothes than 
if I wear my own, nor if I go to sleep in thy bed than if I do so in mine—supposing, I 
mean, that it is about to appear at all. For this thing, be it what it may, that visits 
thee in thy sleep, surely is not so far gone in folly as to see me, and because I am 
dressed in thy clothes, straightway to mistake me for thee. Now however our business is 
to see if it will regard me as of small account, and not vouchsafe to appear to me, 
whether I wear mine own clothes or thine, while it keeps on haunting thee continually. If 
it does so, and appears often, I should myself say that it was from God. For the rest, if 
thy mind is fixed, and it is not possible to turn thee from thy design, but I must needs 
go and sleep in thy bed, well and good, let it be even so; and when I have done as thou 
wishest, then let the dream appear to me. Till such time, however, I shall keep to my 
former opinion."
17. Thus spake Artabanus; and when he had so said, thinking to show Xerxes that his words 
were nought, he did according to his orders. Having put on the garments which Xerxes was 
wont to wear and taken his seat upon the royal throne, he lay down to sleep upon the 
king's own bed. As he slept, there appeared to him the very same dream which had been 
seen by Xerxes; it came and stood over Artabanus, and said:—
"Thou art the man, then, who, feigning to be tender of Xerxes, seekest to dissuade him 
from leading his armies against the Greeks! But thou shalt not escape scathless, either 
now or in time to come, because thou hast sought to prevent that which is fated to 
happen. As for Xerxes, it has been plainly told to himself what will befall him, if he 
refuses to perform my bidding."







7 PLATO: Crito, 213b-d / Phaedo, 221d-222a
7 PLATO: Crito, 213b-d
Soc. Why, Crito, when a man has reached my age he ought not to be repining at the 
approach of death.
Cr. And yet other old men find themselves in similar misfortunes, and age does not 
prevent them from repining.
Soc. That is true. But you have not told me Why you come at this early hour.
Cr. I come to bring you a message which is sad and painful; not, as I believe, to 
yourself, but to all of us who are your friends, and saddest of all to me.
Soc. What? Has the ship come from Delos, on the arrival of which I am to die?
Cr. No, the ship has not actually arrived,
but she will probably be here to day, as persons who have come from Sunium tell me that 
they left her there; and: therefore to morrow, Socrates, will be the last day of your 
life.
Soc. Very well, Crito; if such is the will of God, I am willing; but my belief is that 
there will be a delay of a day.
[44] Cr. Why do you think so?
Soc. I will tell you. I am to die on the day after the arrival of the ship.
Cr. Yes; that is what the authorities say.
Soc. But I do not think that the ship will be here until to-morrow; this I infer from a 
vision which I hail last night, or rather only jus now, when you fortunately allowed me 
to sleep.
Cr. And what was the nature of the vision?
Soc. There appeared to me the likeness of a woman, fair and comely, clothed in raiment, 
who called to me and said” O Socrates,
The third day hence to fertile Phtia shalt thou go.
Cr. What a singular dream, Socrates!
Soc. There can be no doubt about the meaning. Crito, I think.
Cr. Yes; the meaning is only too clear. But, oh! My beloved Socrates, let me entreat you 
once more to take my advice and escape. For if you die I shall not only lose a friend who 
can never be replaced, but there is another evil: people who do not know you and me will 
believe that I might have saved you if I had been willing to give money, but that I did 
not care. Now, can there be a worse disgrace than this- that I should be thought to value 
money more than the life of a friend? for the many will not be persuaded that I wanted 
you to escape, and that you refused.

7 PLATO: Phaedo, 221d-222a
Tell him, Cebes, he replied, what is the truth -that I had no idea of rivalling him or 
his poems; to do so, as I knew, would be no easy task. But I wanted to see whether I 
could purge away a scruple which I felt about the meaning of certain dreams. In the 
course of my life I have often had intimations in dreams “ that I should compose 
music.” The same dream came to me sometimes in one form, and sometimes in another, but 
always saying the same or nearly the same words: “Cultivate and make music,” said the 
dream. And hitherto I had imagined that this was only intended to exhort and encourage me 
in the study of philosophy, which has been the pursuit of my life, [61] and is the 
noblest and best of music. The dream was bidding me do what I was already doing, in the 
same way that the competitor in a race is bidden by the spectators to run when he is 
already running. But I was not certain of this; for the dream might have meant music in 
the popular sense of the word, and being under sentence of death, and the festival giving 
me a respite, I thought that it would be safer for me to satisfy the scruple, and, in 
obedience to the dream, to compose a few verses before I departed. And first I made a 
hymn in honour of the god of the festival, and then considering that a poet, if he is 
really to be a poet, should not only put together words, but should invent stories, and 
that I have no invention, I took some fables of Aesop, which I had ready at hand and 
which I knew—they were the first I came upon—and turned them into verse. Tell this to 
Evenus, Cebes, and bid him be of good cheer; say that I would have him come after me if 
he be a wise man, and not tarry; and that to-day I am likely to be going, for the 
Athenians say that I must.
Simmias said: What a message for such a man! having been a frequent companion of his I 
should say that, as far as I know him, he will never take your advice unless he is 
obliged.
Why, said Socrates,—is not Evenus a philosopher?
I think that he is, said Simmias.
Then he, or any man who has the spirit of philosophy, will be willing to die; but he will 
not take his own life, for that is held to be unlawful.
Here he changed his position, and put his legs off the couch on to the ground, and during 
the rest of the conversation he remained sitting. 
Why do you say, enquired Cebes, that a man ought not to take his own life, but that the 
philosopher will be ready to follow the dying? 
Socrates replied: And have you, Cebes and Simmias, who are the disciples of Philolaus, 
never heard him speak of this?




























8 ARISTOTLE: Prophesying 707a-709a,c esp CH 2 [464ᵇ7-18] 709c
8 ARISTOTLE: Prophesying 707a-709a,c 
1
As to the divination which takes place in sleep, and is said to be based on dreams, we 
cannot lightly either dismiss it with contempt or give it implicit confidence. The fact 
that all persons, or many, suppose dreams to possess a special significance, tends to 
inspire us with be- [15] lief in it [such divination], as founded on the testimony of 
experience; and indeed that divination in dreams should, as regards some subjects, be 
genuine, is not incredible, for it has a show of reason; from which one might form a like 
opinion also respecting all other dreams. Yet the fact of our seeing no probable cause to 
account for such divination tends to inspire us [20] with distrust. For, in addition to 
its further unreasonableness, it is absurd to combine the idea that the sender of such 
dreams should be God with the fact that those to whom he sends them are not the best and 
wisest, but merely commonplace persons.. If, however, we abstract from the causality of 
God, none of the other causes assigned appears probable. For that certain persons should 
have foresight in dreams concerning things destined to take place at the Pillars of 
Hercules, or on the [25] banks of the Borysthenes, seems to be something to discover the 
explanation of which surpasses the wit of man. Well then, the dreams in question must be 
regarded either as causes, or as tokens, of the events, or else as coincidences; either 
as all, or some, of these, or as one only. I use the word 'cause' in the sense in which 
the moon is [the cause] of an eclipse of the sun, or in which fatigue is [a cause] of fe- 
[30] ver; 'token' [in the sense in which] the entrance of a star [into the shadow] is a 
token of the eclipse, or [in which] roughness of the tongue [is a token] of fever; while 
by 'coincidence' I mean, for example, the occurrence of an eclipse of the sun while some 
one is taking a walk; for the walking is neither a token nor 463ᵃ a cause of the 
eclipse, nor the eclipse [a cause or token] of the walking. For this reason no 
coincidence takes place according to a universal or general rule. Are we then to say that 
some dreams are causes, others tokens, e.g. of events taking place in the bodily 
organism? At all events, even scientific physicians tell us [5] that one should pay 
diligent attention to dreams, and to hold this view is reasonable also for those who are 
not practitioners, but speculative philosophers. For the movements which occur in the 
daytime [within the body] are, unless very great and violent, lost sight of in contrast 
with the waking movements, which [10] are more impressive. In sleep the opposite takes 
place, for then even trifling movements seem considerable. This is plain in what often 
happens during sleep; for example, dreamers fancy that they are affected by thunder and 
lightning, when in fact there are only faint ringings in their ears; or that they are 
enjoying honey or other sweet savours, when only a tiny drop of phlegm is flowing down 
[15] [the oesophagus]; or that they are walking through fire, and feeling intense heat, 
when there is only a slight warmth affecting certain parts of the body. When they are 
awakened, these things appear to them in this their true character. But since the 
beginnings of all events are small, so, it is clear, are those also of the diseases or 
other affections about to occur [20] in our bodies. In conclusion, it is manifest that 
these beginnings must be more evident in sleeping than in waking moments.
Nay, indeed, it is not improbable that some of the presentations which come before the 
mind in sleep may even be causes of the actions cognate to each of them. For as when we 
are about to act [in waking hours], or are engaged in any course of action, or have 
already performed certain actions, we often find our- [25] selves concerned with these 
actions, or performing them, in a vivid dream; the cause whereof is that the 
dream-movement has had a way paved for it from the original movements set up in the 
daytime; exactly so, but conversely, it must happen that the movements set up first in 
sleep should also prove to be starting- points of actions to be performed in the daytime, 
since the recurrence by day of the thought of these actions also has had its way [30] 
paved for it in the images before the mind at night. Thus then it is quite conceivable 
that some dreams may be tokens and causes [of future events].
Most [so-called prophetic] dreams are, how- 463ᵇ ever, to be classed as mere 
coincidences, especially all such as are extravagant, and those in the fulfilment of 
which the dreamers have no initiative, such as in the case of a sea-fight, or of things 
taking place far away. As regards these it is natural that the fact should stand as it 
does whenever a person, on mentioning [5] something, finds the very thing mentioned come 
to pass. Why, indeed, should this not happen also in sleep? The probability is, rather, 
that many such things should happen. As, then, one's mentioning a particular person is 
neither token nor cause of this person's presenting himself, so, in the parallel 
instance, the dream is, to him who has seen it, neither token nor cause of its 
[so-called] fulfilment, but a mere coincidence. Hence the fact that many dreams have no 
'fulfilment', for coincidences [10] do not occur according to any universal or general 
law.
2
On the whole, forasmuch as certain of the lower animals also dream, it may be concluded 
that dreams are not sent by God, nor are they designed for this purpose [to reveal the 
future]. They have a divine aspect, however, for Nature [their cause] is divinely 
planned, [15] though not itself divine. A special proof [of their not being sent by God] 
is this: the power of foreseeing the future and of having vivid dreams is found in 
persons of inferior type, which implies that God does not send their dreams; but merely 
that all those whose physical temperament is, as it were, garrulous and excitable, see 
sights of all descriptions; for, inasmuch as they experience many movements of every 
kind, they just chance to have visions resembling objective facts, their luck in these 
[20] matters being merely like that of persons who play at even and odd. For the 
principle which is expressed in the gambler's maxim: 'If you make many throws your luck 
must change,' holds good in their case also.
That many dreams have no fulfilment is not strange, for it is so too with many bodily 
symptoms and weather-signs, e.g. those of [25] rain or wind. For if another movement 
occurs more influential than that from which, while [the event to which it pointed was] 
still future, the given token was derived, the event [to which such token pointed] does 
not take place. So, of the things which ought to be accomplished by human agency, many, 
though well-planned, are by the operation of other principles more powerful [than man's 
agency] brought to nought. For, speaking generally, that which was about to happen is not 
in every case what now is happening; nor is that which shall hereafter be identical with 
that which is now going to be. Still, however, we must hold [30] that the beginnings from 
which, as we said, no consummation follows, are real beginnings, and these constitute 
natural tokens of certain events, even though the events do not come to pass.
As for [prophetic] dreams which involve not such beginnings [sc. of future events] as we 
have here described, but such as are extravagant in times, or places, or magnitudes; or 
464ᵃ those involving beginnings which are not extravagant in any of these respects, 
while yet the persons who see the dream hold not in their own hands the beginnings [of 
the event to which it points] : unless the foresight which such dreams give is the result 
of pure coincidence, the following would be a better explanation of it than that proposed 
by Democritus, [5] who alleges 'images' and 'emanations' as its cause. As, when something 
has caused motion in water or air, this [the portion moved] moves another [portion of 
water or air], and, though the cause has ceased to operate, such motion propagates itself 
to a certain point, though there the prime movement is not present; just so it may well 
be that a movement and a consequent sense-perception should reach [10] sleeping souls 
from the objects from which Democritus represents 'images' and 'emanations' as coming; 
that such movements, in whatever way they arrive, should be more perceptible at night 
[than by day], because when proceeding thus in the daytime they are more liable to 
dissolution (since at night the air is less disturbed, there being then less [15] wind); 
and that they shall be perceived within the body owing to sleep, since persons are more 
sensitive even to slight sensory movements when asleep than when awake. It is these 
movements then that cause 'presentations', as a result of which sleepers foresee the 
future even relatively to such events as those referred¹ to above. These considerations 
also [20] explain why this experience befalls commonplace persons and not the most 
intelligent. For it would have regularly occurred both in the daytime and to the wise had 
it been God who sent it; but, as we have explained the matter, it is quite natural that 
commonplace persons should be those who have foresight [in dreams]. For the mind of such 
persons is not given to thinking, but, as it were, derelict, or totally vacant, and, when 
once set moving, is borne passively on in the direction taken by that which moves it. 
With regard to the fact [25] that some persons who are liable to derangement have this 
foresight, its explanation is that their normal mental movements do not impede [the alien 
movements], but are beaten off by the latter. Therefore it is that they have an 
especially keen perception of the alien movements.
That certain persons in particular should have vivid dreams, e.g. that familiar friends 
should thus have foresight in a special degree respecting one another, is due to the fact 
that such friends are most solicitous on one another's behalf. For as acquaintances in 
particular [30] recognize and perceive one another a long way of?, so also they do as 
regards the sensory movements respecting one another; for sensory movements which refer 
to persons familiarly known are themselves more familiar. Atrabilious persons, owing to 
their impetuosity, are, when they, as it were, shoot from a distance, expert at hitting; 
while, owing to their muta- 464ᵇ bility, the series of movements deploys quickly before 
their minds. For even as the insane recite, or con over in thought, the poems of 
Philaegides, e.g. the Aphrodite, whose parts succeed in order of similitude, just so do 
they [the 'atrabilious'] go on and on stringing sensory movements together. Moreover, 
owing to their aforesaid impetuosity, one movement [5] within them is not liable to be 
knocked out of its course by some other movement.
The most skilful interpreter of dreams is he who has the faculty of observing 
resemblances. Any one may interpret dreams which are vivid and plain. But, speaking of 
'resemblances', I mean that dream presentations are analogous to the forms reflected in 
water, as indeed we have already stated. In the latter case, if the [10] motion in the 
water be great, the reflexion has no resemblance to its original, nor do the forms 
resemble the real objects. Skilful, indeed, would he be in interpreting such reflexions 
who could rapidly discern, and at a glance comprehend, the scattered and distorted 
fragments of such forms, so as to perceive that one of them represents a man, or a horse, 
[15] or anything whatever. Accordingly, in the other case also, in a similar way, some 
such thing as this [blurred image] is all that a dream amounts to; for the internal 
movement effaces the clearness of the dream.
The questions, therefore, which we proposed as to the nature of sleep and the dream, and 
the cause to which each of them is due, and also as to divination as a result of dreams, 
in every form of it, have now been discussed.
8 ARISTOTLE: Prophesying esp CH 2 [464ᵇ7-18] 709c
The most skilful interpreter of dreams is he who has the faculty of observing 
resemblances. Any one may interpret dreams which are vivid and plain. But, speaking of 
'resemblances', I mean that dream presentations are analogous to the forms reflected in 
water, as indeed we have already stated. In the latter case, if the [10] motion in the 
water be great, the reflexion has no resemblance to its original, nor do the forms 
resemble the real objects. Skilful, indeed, would he be in interpreting such reflexions 
who could rapidly discern, and at a glance comprehend, the scattered and distorted 
fragments of such forms, so as to perceive that one of them represents a man, or a horse, 
[15] or anything whatever. Accordingly, in the other case also, in a similar way, some 
such thing as this [blurred image] is all that a dream amounts to; for the internal 
movement effaces the clearness of the dream.




























14 PLUTARCH: Pvrrhus, 329c-d / Cimon, 398d- 399b / Eumenes, 473a-b / Alexander, 548d-549a 
/ Demosthenes, 702c-703b / Demetrius, 727b-d
14 PLUTARCH: Pvrrhus, 329c-d
Where Pyrrhus himself fought was the hottest of the action and many of the Spartans did 
gallantly, but in particular one Phyllius signalised himself, made the best resistance, 
and killed most assailants; and when he found himself ready to sink with the many wounds 
he had received, retiring a little out of his place behind another, he fell down among 
his fellow-soldiers, that the enemy might not carry off his body.
The fight ended with the day, and Pyrrhus, in his sleep, dreamed that he drew 
thunderbolts upon Lacedaemon, and set it all on fire, and rejoiced at the sight; and 
waking, in this transport of joy, he commanded his officers to get all things ready for a 
second assault, and relating his dream among his friends, supposing it to mean that he 
should take the town by storm, the rest assented to it with admiration, but Lysimachus 
was not pleased with the dream, and told him he feared lest as places struck with 
lightning are held sacred, and not to be trodden upon, so the gods might by this let him 
know the city should not be taken. Pyrrhus replied, that all these things were but idle 
talk, full of uncertainty, and only fit to amuse the vulgar; their thought, with their 
swords in their hands, should always be—
The one good omen is King Pyrrhus's cause, and so got up, and drew out his army to the 
walls by break of day.
The Lacedaemonians, in resolution and courage, made a defence even beyond their power; 
the women were all by, helping them to arms, and bringing bread and drink to those that 
desired it, and taking care of the wounded. The Macedonians attempted to fill up the 
trench, bringing huge quantities of materials and throwing them upon the arms and dead 
bodies, that lay there and were covered over. While the Lacedaemonians opposed this with 
all their force, Pyrrhus, in person, appeared on their side of the trench and the 
waggons, pressing on horseback toward the city, at which the men who had that post 
calling out, and the women shrieking and running about, while Pyrrhus violently pushed 
on, and beat down all that disputed his way, his horse received a shot in the belly from 
a Cretan arrow, and, in his convulsions as he died, threw off Pyrrhus on slippery and 
steep ground. And all about him being in confusion at this, the Spartans came boldly up, 
and making good use of their missiles, forced them off again.

14 PLUTARCH: Cimon, 398d- 399b 
Cimon, as soon as he returned, put an end to the war, and reconciled the two cities. 
Peace thus established, seeing the Athenians impatient of being idle, and eager after the 
honour and aggrandisement of war, lest they should set upon the Greeks themselves, or 
with so many ships cruising about the isles and Peloponnesus they should give occasions 
to intestine wars, or complaints of their allies against them, he equipped two hundred 
galleys, with design to make an attempt upon Egypt and Cyprus; purposing, by this means, 
to accustom the Athenians to fight against the barbarians, and enrich themselves honestly 
by spoiling those who were the natural enemies of Greece.
But when all things were prepared, and the army ready to embark, Cimon had this dream. It 
seemed to him that there was a furious bitch barking at him, and mixed with the barking a 
kind of human voice uttered these words:-
Come on, for thou shalt shortly be,
A pleasure to my whelps and me.
This dream was hard to interpret, yet Astyphilus of Posidonia, a man skilled in 
divinations, and intimate with Cimon, told him that his death was presaged by this 
vision, which he thus explained. A dog is enemy to him he barks at; and one is always 
most a pleasure to one's enemies when one is dead; the mixture of human voice with 
barking signifies the Medes, for the army of the Medes is mixed up of Greeks and 
barbarians. After this dream, as he was sacrificing to Bacchus, and the priest cutting up 
the victim, a number of ants, taking up the congealed particles of the blood, laid them 
about Cimon's great toe. This was not observed for a good while, but at the very time 
when Cimon spied it, the priest came and showed him the liver of the sacrifice imperfect, 
wanting that part of it called the head. But he could not then recede from the 
enterprise, so he set sail. Sixty of his ships he sent toward Egypt; with the rest he 
went and fought the King of Persia's fleet, composed of Phoenician and Cilician galleys, 
recovered all the cities thereabout, and threatened Egypt; designing no less than the 
entire ruin of the Persian empire. And all the more for that he was informed Themistocles 
was in great repute among the barbarians, having promised the king to lead his army, 
whenever he should make war upon Greece. But Themistocles, it is said, abandoning all 
hopes of compassing his designs, very much out of the despair of overcoming the valour 
and good fortune of Cimon, died a voluntary death.
Cimon, intent on great designs, which he was now to enter upon, keeping his navy about 
the isle of Cyprus, sent messengers to consult the oracle of Jupiter Ammon upon some 
secret matter. For it is not known about what they were sent, and the god would give them 
no answer, but commanded them to return again, for that Cimon was already with him. 
Hearing this, they returned to sea, and as soon as they came to the Grecian army, which 
was then about Egypt, they understood that Cimon was dead; and computing the time of the 
oracle, they found that his death had been signified, he being then already with the gods.

14 PLUTARCH: Eumenes, 473a-b
Craterus, therefore, sent on Antipater into Cilicia, and himself and Neoptolemus marched 
with a large division of the army against Eumenes; expecting to come upon him unawares, 
and to find his army disordered with revelling after the late victory. Now that Eumenes 
should suspect his coming, and be prepared to receive him, is an argument of his 
vigilance, but not perhaps a proof of any extraordinary sagacity, but that he should 
contrive both to conceal from his enemies the disadvantages of his position, and from his 
own men whom they were to fight with, so that he led them on against Craterus himself, 
without their knowing that he commanded the enemy, this, indeed, seems to show peculiar 
address and skill in the general. He gave out that Neoptolemus and Pigres were 
approaching with some Cappadocian and Paphlagonian horse. 
And at night, having resolved on marching, he fell asleep, and had an extraordinary 
dream. For he thought he saw two Alexanders ready to engage, each commanding his several 
phalanx, the one assisted by Minerva, the other by Ceres; and that after a hot dispute, 
he on whose side Minerva was, was beaten, and Ceres, gathering ears of corn, wove them 
into a crown for the victor. This vision Eumenes interpreted at once as boding success to 
himself, who was to fight for a fruitful country, and at that very time covered with the 
young ears, the whole being sown with corn, and the fields so thick with it that they 
made a beautiful show of a long peace.
And he was further emboldened when he understood that the enemy's password was "Minerva 
and Alexander." Accordingly he also gave out as his "Ceres and Alexander," and gave his 
men orders to make garlands for themselves, and to dress their arms with wreaths of corn. 
He found himself under many temptations to discover to his captains and officers whom 
they were to engage with, and not to conceal a secret of such moment in his own breast 
alone, yet he kept to his first resolutions, and ventured to run the hazard of his own 
judgment.
When he came to give battle, he would not trust any Macedonian to engage Craterus, but 
appointed two troops of foreign horse, commanded by Pharnabazus, son to Artabazus, and 
Phoenix of Tenedos, with order to charge as soon as ever they saw the enemy, without 
giving them leisure to speak or retire, or receiving any herald or trumpet from them. For 
he was exceedingly afraid about his Macedonians, lest, if they found out Craterus to be 
there, they should go over to his side. He himself, with three hundred of his best horse, 
led the right wing against Neoptolemus. When having passed a little hill they came in 
view, and were seen advancing with more than ordinary briskness, Craterus was amazed, and 
bitterly reproached Neoptolemus for deceiving him with hopes of the Macedonians' revolt, 
but he encouraged his men to do bravely, and forthwith charged.

14 PLUTARCH: Alexander, 548d-549a 
From hence he advanced into Paphlagonia and Cappadocia, both which countries he soon 
reduced to obedience, and then hearing of the death of Memnon, the best commander Darius 
had upon the sea-coasts, who, if he had lived, might, it was supposed, have put many 
impediments and difficulties in the way of the progress of his arms, he was the rather 
encouraged to carry the war into the upper provinces of Asia.
Darius was by this time upon his march from Susa, very confident, not only in the number 
of his men, which amounted to six hundred thousand, but likewise in a dream, which the 
Persian soothsayers interpreted rather in flattery to him than according to the natural 
probability. He dreamed that he saw the Macedonian phalanx all on fire, and Alexander 
waiting on him, clad in the same dress which he himself had been used to wear when he was 
courier to the late king; after which, going into the temple of Belus, he vanished out of 
his sight. The dream would appear to have supernaturally signified to him the illustrious 
actions the Macedonians were to perform, and that as he, from a courier's place, had 
risen to the throne, so Alexander should come to be master of Asia, and not long 
surviving his conquests, conclude his life with glory.
Darius's confidence increased the more, because Alexander spent so much time in Cilicia, 
which he imputed to his cowardice. But it was sickness that detained him there, which 
some say he contracted from his fatigues, others from bathing in the river Cydnus, whose 
waters were exceedingly cold. However, it happened, none of his physicians would venture 
to give him any remedies, they thought his case so desperate, and were so afraid of the 
suspicions and ill-will of the Macedonians if they should fail in the cure; till Philip, 
the Acarnanian, seeing how critical his case was, but relying on his own well-known 
friendship for him, resolved to try the last efforts of his art, and rather hazard his 
own credit and life than suffer him to perish for want of physic, which he confidently 
administered to him, encouraging him to take it boldly, if he desired a speedy recovery, 
in order to prosecute the war.

14 PLUTARCH: Demosthenes, 702c-703b 
Yet it was no long time that he enjoyed his country after his return, the attempts of the 
Greeks being soon all utterly defeated. For the battle of Cranon happened in Metagitnion, 
in Boedromion the garrison entered into Munychia, and in the Pyanepsion following died 
Demosthenes after this manner.
Upon the report that Antipater and Craterus were coming to Athens, Demosthenes with his 
party took their opportunity to escape privily out of the city; but sentence of death 
was, upon the motion of Demades, passed upon them by the people. They dispersed 
themselves, flying some to one place, some to another; and Antipater sent about his 
soldiers into all quarters to apprehend them. Archias was their captain, and was thence 
called the Exilehunter. He was a Thurian born, and is reported to have been an actor of 
tragedies, and they say that Polus, of ^Egina, the best actor of his time, was his 
scholar; but Hermippus reckons Archias among the disciples of Lacritus, the orator, and 
Demetrius says he spent some time with Anaximenes. This Archias finding Hyperides, the 
orator, Aritonicus of Marathon, and Himeraeus, the brother of Demetrius the Phalerian, in 
JEg'ma, took them by force out of the temple of iEcus, whither they were fled for safety, 
and sent them to Antipater, then at Cleonae, where they were all put to death; and 
Hyperides, they say, had his tongue cut out.
Demosthenes, he heard, had taken sanctuary at the temple of Neptune in Calauria, and, 
crossing over thither in some light vessels, as soon as he had landed himself, and the 
Thracian spearmen that came with him, he endeavoured to persuade Demosthenes to accompany 
him to Antipater, as if he should meet with no hard usage from him. But Demosthenes, in 
his sleep the night before, had a strange dream. It seemed to him that he was acting a 
tragedy, and contended with Archias for the victory; and though he acquitted himself 
well, and gave good satisfaction to the spectators, yet for want of better furniture and 
provision for the stage, he lost the day. And so, while Archias was discoursing to him 
with many expressions of kindness, he sate still in the same posture, and looking up 
steadfastly up on him, "O Archias," said he, "I am as little affected by your promises 
now as I used formerly to be by your acting." Archias at this beginning to grow angry and 
to threaten him, "Now," said Demosthenes, "you speak like the genuine Macedonian oracle; 
before you were but acting a part. Therefore forbear only a little, while I write a word 
or two home to my family."
Having thus spoken, he withdrew into the temple, and taking a scroll, as if he meant to 
write, he put the reed into his mouth, and biting it as he was wont to do when he was 
thoughtful or writing, he held it there some time. Then he bowed down his head and 
covered it. The soldiers that stood at the door, supposing all this to proceed from want 
of courage and fear of death, in derision called him effeminate, and faint-hearted, and 
coward. And Archias drawing near, desired him to rise up, and repeating the same kind of 
thing he had spoken before, he once more promised to make his peace with Antipater. But 
Demosthenes, perceiving that now the poison had pierced, and seized his vitals, uncovered 
his head, and fixing his eyes upon Archias, "Now," said he, "as soon as you please, you 
may commence the- part of Creon in the tragedy, and cast out this body of mine unburied. 
But, O gracious Neptune, I, for my part, while I am yet alive, will rise up and depart 
out of this sacred place; though Antipater and the Macedonians have not left so much as 
thy temple unpolluted." After he had thus spoken and desired to be held up, because 
already he began to tremble and stagger, as he was going forward, and passing by the 
altar, he fell down, and with a groan gave up the ghost.
Ariston says that he took the poison out of a reed, as we have shown before. But Pappus, 
a certain historian whose history was recovered by Hermippus, says that as he fell near 
the altar, there was found in his scroll this beginning only of a letter, and nothing 
more, "Demosthenes to Antipater." And that when his sudden death was much wondered at, 
the Thracians who guarded the doors reported that he took the poison into his hand out of 
a rag, and put it in his mouth, and that they imagined it had been gold which he 
swallowed, but the maid that served him, being examined by the followers of Archias, 
affirmed that he had worn it in a bracelet for a long time, as an amulet. And 
Eratosthenes also says that he kept the poison in a hollow ring, and that that ring was 
the bracelet which he wore about his arm.


14 PLUTARCH: Demetrius, 727b-d 
Let us here record an example in the early life of Demetrius, showing his natural humane 
and kindly disposition. It was an adventure which passed betwixt him and Mithridates, the 
son of Ariobarzanes, who was about the same age with Demetrius, and lived with him, in 
attendance on Antigonus; and although nothing was said or could be said to his reproach, 
he fell under suspicion, in consequence of a dream which Antigonus had. Antigonus thought 
himself in a fair and spacious field, where he sowed golden seed, and saw presently a 
golden crop come up; of which, however, looking presently again, he saw nothing remain 
but the stubble, without the ears. And as he stood by in anger and vexation, he heard 
some voices saying Mithridates had cut the golden harvest and carried it off into Pontus. 
Antigonus, much discomposed with his dream, first bound his son by an oath not to speak, 
and then related it to him, adding that he had resolved, in consequence, to lose no time 
in ridding himself of Mithridates, and making away with him.
Demetrius was extremely distressed; and when the young man came, as usual, to pass his 
time with him, to keep his oath he forbore from saying a word, but, drawing him aside 
little by little from the company, as soon as they were by themselves, without opening 
his lips, with the point of his javelin he traced before him the words "Fly, 
Mithridates." Mithridates took the hint, and fled by night into Cappadocia, where 
Antigonus's dream about him was quickly brought to its due fulfillment; for he got 
possession of a large and fertile territory; and from him descended the line of the kings 
of Pontus, which, in the eighth generation, was reduced by the Romans. This may serve for 
a specimen of the early goodness and love of justice that was part of Demetrius's natural 
character.
But as in the elements of the world, Empedocles tells us, out of liking and dislike, 
there spring up contention and warfare, and all the more, the closer the contact, or the 
nearer the approach of the objects, even so the perpetual hostilities among the 
successors of Alexander were aggravated and inflamed, in particular cases, by 
juxtaposition of interests and of territories; as, for example, in the case of Antigonus 
and Ptolemy. News came to Antigonus that Ptolemy had crossed from Cyprus and invaded 
Syria, and was ravaging the country and reducing the cities. Remaining, therefore, 
himself in Phrygia, he sent Demetrius, now twenty-two years old, to make his first essay 
as sole commander in an important charge.



















21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, IX [13-69] 66a-c; XIX [1-63] 81c-82a; XXVII [91-108] 
95c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, IX [13-69] 66a-c
13. At the hour near the morning when the little swallow begins her sad lays,¹ perhaps 
in memory of her former woes, and when our mind, more a wanderer from the flesh and less 
captive to the thought, is in its visions almost divine,² in dream I seemed to see an 
eagle with feathers of gold poised in the sky, with wings spread, and intent to stoop. 
And I seemed to be there³ where his own people were abandoned by Ganymede, when he was 
rapt to the supreme consistory. In myself I thought perhaps this bird strikes only here 
through wont, and perhaps from other place disdains to carry anyone upward in its feet. 
Then it seemed to me that, having wheeled a little, it descended terrible as a 
thunderbolt, and snatched me upwards far as the fire.⁴ There it seemed that it and I 
burned, and the imagined fire so scorched that of necessity my sleep was broken.
34. Not otherwise Achilles shook himself—turning around his awakened eyes, and not 
knowing where he was, when his mother stole him away, sleeping in her arms, from Chiron 
to Scyros, thither whence afterwards the Greeks withdrew him⁵—than I started, as from 
my face sleep fled away; and I became pale, as does a man who, frightened, turns to ice. 
At my side was my Comforter alone, and the sun was now more than two hours high, and my 
face was turned toward the sea.
46. "Have no fear," said my Lord; "be reassured, for we are at a good point; restrain 
not, but put forth all thy strength. Thou art now arrived at Purgatory; see there the 
cliff that closes it round; see the entrance there where it appears divided. Short while 
ago, in the dawn that precedes the day, when thy soul was sleeping within thee upon the 
flowers wherewith
¹The allusion is to the story of Procne and Philomela, transformed the one into a 
swallow, the other into a nightingale.
²Cf. Hell, xxvi. 7.
³On Mount Ida.
⁴The sphere of fire by which, according to mediaeval cosmography, the sphere of the air 
was surrounded.
⁵Statius tells how Thetis, to prevent Achilles from going to the siege of Troy, bore 
him, sleeping, away from his instructor, the centaur Chiron, and carried him to the 
Island of Scyros, where, though concealed in women's garments, Ulysses and Diomed 
discovered him.

the place down yonder is adorned, came a lady, and said: 'I am Lucia;⁶ let me take this 
one who is sleeping; thus will I assist him along his way.' Sordello remained, and the 
other noble forms: she took thee up, and as the day grew bright, she came upward, and I 
along her footprints. Here she laid thee down: and first her beautiful eyes showed me 
that open entrance; then she and slumber went away together."
64. Like a man who in perplexity is reassured, and who changes his fear into confidence 
after the truth is disclosed to him, so did I change; and when my Leader saw me free from 
disquiet, up along the cliff he moved on, and I behind, toward the height.
⁶Cf. Hell, ii.

21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, XIX [1-63] 81c-82a
CANTO XIX
I. At the hour when the heat of day, vanquished by the Earth or sometimes by Saturn, can 
no longer warm the coldness of the moon, —when the geomancers see in the east, before 
the dawn, their Greater Fortune⁵ rising along a path which short while stays dark for 
it,—there came to me in dream⁶ a woman stammering, with eyes asquint, and crooked on 
her feet, with hands lopped off, and pallid in her color. I gazed at her; and as the sun 
comforts the cold limbs which the night benumbs, so did my look make her tongue nimble, 
and then in short while set her wholly straight, and so colored her wan face as love 
requires. Then, when thus she had her speech unloosed, she began to sing, so that with 
difficulty should I have turned my attention from her. "I am," she sang, "I am the sweet 
Siren, who bewitch the mariners in mid sea, so full am I of pleasantness to hear. I 
turned Ulysses from his wandering way by my song; and whoso customs himself with me 
seldom departs, so wholly do I satisfy him."
25. Not yet was her mouth closed, when at my side a Lady appeared, holy and ready to put 
her to confusion. "O Virgil, O Virgil, who is this?" she sternly said; and he came with 
his eyes fixed only on that modest one. She took hold of the other, and in front she 
opened her, rending her garments, and showed me her belly; this waked me with the stench 
that issued from it. I turned my eyes to the good Master: "At least three calls have I 
given thee," he said; "arise and come on; let us find the gate through which thou mayst 
enter."
37. I rose up, and all the circles of the sacred mountain were already full of the high 
day, and we went on with the new sun at our backs. Following him, I was bearing my 
forehead like one who has it laden with thought, and who makes of himself a half arch of 
a bridge, when I heard: "Come ye! here is the passage," spoken in a mode soft and benign, 
such as is not
⁵Geomancy is divination by an arrangement of points on the ground, or of pebbles, in 
certain figures which have special names. One of them, in this form, : : . . ,  was 
called the Greater Fortune. The stars forming the figure of the Greater Fortune would be 
in the east about two hours before sunrise.
⁶Cf. Hell, xxvi. 7.

heard in this mortal region. With open wings, which seemed as of a swan, he who had thus 
spoken to us turned us upward, between two walls of the hard rock. Then he moved his 
pinions, and fanned us, affirming qui lugent¹ to be blessed, for they shall have their 
souls mistresses of consolation.
52. "What ails thee that thou gazest only on the ground?" my Guide began to say to me, 
both of us having mounted up a little from the Angel. And I: "With such mistrust a recent 
vision makes me go, which bends me to itself so that I cannot withdraw me from the 
thought of it." "Hast thou seen," said he, "that ancient sorceress, who above us 
henceforth is alone lamented ? Hast thou seen how from her man is unbound.? Let it 
suffice thee, and strike thy heels on the ground; turn upward thine eyes to the lure 
which the eternal King whirls with the great circles."²
¹They that mourn.
²Ct. Canto xiv. 148-150.

21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, XXVII [91-108] 95c
and thus gazing upon them, sleep overcame me, sleep which oft before the deed be done 
knows news thereof.
94. At the hour, I think, when from the east Cytherea, who with fire of love seems always 
burning, first beamed upon the mountain,² I seemed in dream to see a lady, young and 
beautiful, going through a meadow gathering flowers, and singing she was saying: "Let him 
know, whoso asks my name, that I am Leah, and I go moving my fair hands around to make me 
a garland. To please me at the mirror I here adorn me, but my sister Rachel never departs 
from her looking-glass, and sits all day. She is as fain to look at her fair eyes as I to 
adorn me with my hands. Her, seeing, and me, doing satisfies."³
²Venus, the morning star, was rising. Cf. Canto i. 19, 20.
³Leah and Rachel are the types of the active and the contemplative life.















22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK V, STANZA 52-55 127a-b; STANZA 177-186 143b-144b; 
STANZA 207-219 147a-149a; STANZA 245 152a / Nun's Priest's Tale [14,898-15,162] 451a- 455b
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK V, STANZA 52-55 127a-b
52
Thy swevenes eek and al swich fantasye
Dryf out, and lat hem faren to mischaunce;
For they procede of thy malencolye,
That doth thee fele in sleep al this penaunce.
A straw for alle swevenes signifiaunce!
God helpe me so, I counte hem not a bene,
Ther woot no man aright what dremes mene.
53
For prestes of the temple tellen this,
That dremes been the revelaciouns
Of goddes, and as wel they telle, y-wis.
That they ben infernals illusiouns;
And leches seyn, that of complexiouns
Proceden they, or fast, or glotonye.
Who woot in sooth thus what they signifye?
54
Eek othere seyn that thorugh impressiouns,
As if a wight hath faste a thing in minde.
That ther-of cometh swiche avisiouns;
And othere seyn, as they in bokes finde.
That, after tymes of the yeer by kinde,
Men dreme, and that th'effect goth by the mone;
But leve no dreem, for it is nought to done.
55
Wel worth of dremes ay thise olde wyves,
And treweliche eek augurie of thise foules;
For fere of which men wenen lese her lyves,
As ravenes qualm, or shryking of thise oules.
To trowen on it bothe fals and foul is.
Alias, alias, so noble a creature
As is a man, shal drede swich ordure!

52
"And all your dreams and other such like folly,
To deep oblivion let them be consigned;
For they arise but from your melancholy,
By which your health is being undermined.
A straw for all the meaning you can find
In dreams! They aren't worth a hill of beans,
For no one knows what dreaming really means.
53
"Priests in the temples sometimes choose to say
That dreams come from the Gods as revelations;
But other times they speak another way,
And call them hellish false hallucinations!
And doctors say they come from complications,
Or fast or surfeit, or any other lie,
For who knows truly what they signify ?
54
"And others say that through impressions deep,
As when one has a purpose firm in mind,
There come these visions in one's sleep;
And others say that they in old books find,
That every season hath its special kind
Of dream, and all depends upon the moon;
But all such folk are crazy as a loon!
55.
"Dreams are the proper business of old wives,
Who draw-their auguries from birds and fowls,
For which men often fear to lose their lives,
The raven's croak or mournful shriek of owls!
O why put trust in bestial shrieks and howls!
Alas, that noble man should be so brash
To implicate his mind in such like trash!

22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK V, STANZA 177-186 143b-144b
177
So on a day he leyde him doun to slepe,
And so bifel that in his sleep him thoughte,
That in a forest faste he welk to wepe
For love of hir that him these peynes wroughte;
And up and doun as he the forest soughte,
He mette he saugh a boor with tuskes grete,
That sleep ayein the bright sonnes hete.
178
And by this boor, faste in his armes folde,
Lay kissing ay his lady bright Criseyde:
For sorwe of which, whan he it gan biholde,
And for despyt, out of his slepe he breyde,
And loude he cryde on Pandarus, and seyde,
"O Pandarus, now knowe I crop and rote!
I nam but deed, ther nis non other bote!
179
My lady bright Criseyde hath me bitrayed,
In whom I trusted most of any wight,
She elles-where hath now hir herte apayed;
The blisful goddes, through hir grete might,
Han in my dreem y-shewed it ful right.
Thus in my dreem Criseyde I have biholde"—
And al this thing to Pandarus he tolde.
180
"O my Criseyde, alias! what subtiltee,
What newe lust, what beautee, what science,
What wratthe of juste cause have ye
to me?
What gilt of me, what fel experience
Hath fro me raft, alias! thyn advertence?
O trust, O feyth, O depe aseurance,
Who hath me reft Criseyde, al my plesaunce?
177
It chanced one day he laid him down to sleep,
And in his restless slumber, so he thought,
Within a wood he went to walk and weep,
For love of her who all this wrong had wrought,
And down a path, his eyes a vision caught;
A tusked boar appeared in his sad dreams,
Asleep and lying in the bright sunbeams,
178
And by this boar, whom in her arms she held,
Lay Cressida, kissing the fearsome beast.
And suddenly this vision strange expelled
All sleep, and from his dreaming thus released,
Troilus knew all hope for him had ceased.
"O Pandar," cried he, "now I know the worst!
I am a man abandoned and accursed!
179
"My lady Cressida hath me betrayed,
In whom was all my trust and my delight;
Her love she hath elsewhere conveyed!
The blessed Gods above through their great might
Have in my dreams revealed it to my sight!
Thus in my dreams I did my love behold—"
And all the tale to Pandar he then told.
180
"O Cressida, what baseless treachery,
What lust of heart, what beauty or what wit—,
What wrath with just cause have you felt
towards me ?
What guilt in me, what thoughts or deeds unfit
Have caused thy heart away from me to flit ?
O trust! O faith! O hopes that life inspire!
O who hath robbed me of my heart's desire!

181
"Alas, why did I ever let you go?
O, by what folly was I thus misled?
What faith on oaths can I henceforth bestow!
God knows I was convinced in heart and head,
That every word was Gospel that you said.
But treason oft doth show its hateful face
In those in whom the greatest trust we place.
182
"What shall I do? What now is left for me?
There falls on me anew so sharp a pain,
For which there can be found no remedy, 
Better to kill myself with these hands twain
Than in this life of misery remain!
Death at the least a final peace will send,
But life is daily death that hath no end !"
183
Then Pandar answered him, "Alas the while
That I was born! Have I not said ere this,
That dreams all sorts of folk all times beguile ?
And why ? They all interpret them amiss!
To charge her false on dreams is cowardice,
Because your dreams rise only from your fear,
And what they mean, you never can make clear.
184
"This dream that you have had about a boar,
It well may be that it doth signify
Her father, old and of his head so hoar,
Who near his death doth in the warm sun lie,
While she for natural grief must weep and cry,
And kiss him as he lies there on the ground—
This is the way you should your dream expound."
185
"Perhaps," said Troilus. "I wish I knew
For certain how to judge my dream aright."
"I'll tell you then," said Pandar, "what to do!
Since you know well enough how to endite,
Bestir yourself and to your lady write.
I know no better way of finding out
The truth and freeing so your mind of doubt.
186
"That way you'll know just how things stand,
for better
Or worse; for if untrue she means to be,
She will not send an answer to your letter;
And if she writes, then you can quickly see
If she to come again to Troy is free,
And if she's let and hindered in some way,
She will explain it all as clear as day.

181
Alias! why lcet I you from hennes go,
For which wel neigh out of my wit I breyde?
Who shal now trowe on any othes mo?
God wot I wende, O lady bright, Criseyde,
That every word was gospel that ye seyde!
But who may bet bigylen, if him liste,
Than he on whom men weneth best to triste?
182
What shal I doon, my Pandarus, alias!
I fele now so sharpe a newe peyne,
Sin that ther is no remedie in this cas,
That bet were it I with myn hondes tweyne
My-selven slow, than alwey thus to pleyne.
For through my deeth my wo sholde han an ende,
Ther every day with lyf my-self I shende."
183
Pandare answerde and seyde, "alias the whyle
That I was born; have I not seyd er this,
That dremes many a maner man bigyle?
And why? for folk expounden hem a-mis.
How darstow seyn that fals thy lady is,
For any dreem, right for thyn owene drede?
Lat be this thought, thou canst no dremes rede.
184
Paraunter, ther thou dremest of this boor,
It may so be that it may signifye
Hir fader, which that old is and eek hoor,
Ayein the sonne lyth, on poynt to dye,
And she for sorwe ginneth wepe and crye,
And kisseth him, ther he lyth on the grounde;
Thus ahuldestow thy dreem a-right expounde."
185
"How mighte I thanne do?" quod Troilus,
"To knowe of this, ye, were it never so lyte?"
"Now seystow wysly," quod this Pandarus,
"My reed is this, sin thou canst wel endyte,
That hastely a lettre thou hir wryte,
Thorugh which thou shalt wel bringen it aboute,
To knowe a sooth of that thou art in doute.
186
And see now why; for this I dar wel
seyn,
That if so is that she untrewe be,
I can not trowe that she wol wryte ayeyn.
And if she wryte, thou shalt ful sone see,
As whether she hath any libertee
To come ayein, or elles in som clause,
If she be let, she wol assigne a cause.

22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK V, STANZA 207-219 147a-149a
207
This dreem, of which I told have eek biforn,
May never come out of his remembraunce;
He thoughte ay wel he hadde his lady lorn,
And that Joves, of his purveyaunce,
Him shewed hadde in sleep the signifiaunce
Of hir untrouthe and his disaventure,
And that the boor was shewed him in figure.
208
For which he for Sibille his suster sente,
That called was Cassandre eek al aboute;
And al his dreem he tolde hir er he stente,
And hir bisoughte assoilen him the doute
Of the stronge boor, with tuskes stoute;
And fynally, with-inne a litel stounde,
Cassandre him gan right thus his dreem expounde.
209
She gan first smyle, and seyde, "O brother dere.
If thou a sooth of this desyrest knowe,
Thou most a fewe of olde stories here,
To purpos, how that fortune over-throwe
Hath lordes olde; through which, with-inne a
throwe,
Thou wel this boor shalt knowe, and of what kinde
He comen is, as men in bokes finde.
210
Diane, which that wrooth was and in ire
For Grekes nolde doon hir sacrifyse,
Ne encens up-on hir auter sette a-fyre,
She, for that Grekes gonne hir so dispyse,
Wrak hir in a wonder cruel wyse.
For with a boor as greet as oxe in stalle
She made up frete hir corn and vynes alle.
211
To slee this boor was al the contree reysed,
A-monges which ther com, this boor to see,
A mayde, oon of this world the best y-preysed;

207
This dream, of which I have already told,
He never from his fancy could expel,
Nor could he doubt his lady had grown cold,
Nor yet that Jove had taken means to tell
By dreams, when heavy sleep upon him fell,
Of her untruth and his disastrous fate-
All which the boar was meant to indicate.
208
Then for his sister Sibly straight he sent,
Known also as Cassandra round about,
And told his dream to her just at it went,
And asked her to resolve his mind of doubt,
Concerning this great boar with tusks so stout;
And soon as she the meaning of it found,
She thus began his vision to expound.
209
Smiling a prophet's smile, "O brother dear,"
She said, "if you the truth will really know,
Then you must first a few old stories hear,
Which tell how fortune once did overthrow
Some lords of old, and thereby I shall
show
And tell you whence this boar, and of what kind,
As in the books the story you may find.
210
"Diana, filled with anger and with ire,
Because the Greeks withheld her sacrifice,
Nor on her altar set incense afire,
In vengeance made them pay a cruel price,
And this, in long and short, was her device,
She let a boar, as great as ox in stall,
Devour their growing corn and vines and all.
211
"To slay this boar the countryside was raised,
And there among came one, the boar to see,
A maiden whom all in that region praised;

And Meleager, lord of that country.
So loved the maiden, t.nr and fresh and tree,
That into battle with this boar he went.
And killing it, its head unto her sent.
212
"From this, as ancient writers tell to us.
There rose a contest and a warfare high.
And from this lord descended Tydeus,
By line direct, as no one can deny;
But how this Meleager came to die
Through his own mother, that I shall not tell,
For on that tale it were too long to dwell."
213
How Tydeus made warfare Sibyl told,
At Thebes, that ancient city and so strong,
Maintaining that to Polynices bold,
The Theban city did by right belong,
And that Eteocles, his brother, wrong
Had done, in holding Thebes by strength—
All this she told to him and at great length.
214
She also told about Haemonides,
When Tydeus slew fifty knights so stout,
And told of all the wondrous prophecies,
And how the seven kings for Thebes set out,
And then besieged the city round about,
And of the holy serpent and the well,
And of the Furies, all this did she tell;
215
And Archemorus' death and funeral plays,
And how Amphiorax fell through the ground,
How Tydeus was slain and closed his days,
And also how Ipomedon was drowned,
And Parthenope final death wound found,
And how Capaneus, the strong and proud,
Was slain by stroke of thunder, sounding loud.
216
And then she told the tale how either brother,
Eteocles and Polynices true,
How each of them in skirmish killed the other,
And how Argia wept and made ado;
The burning of the town did she review,
And so descended down from stories old
To Diomede, and of him thus she told.
"This boar you dreamed of stands for Diomede,
Tydeus' son, of Meleager's line,
Who killed the boar and won fame by that deed;
Thy lady, if in fact she once was thine,
With Diomede in love doth now combine;
Be glad or sad, but there can be no doubt,
This Diomede is in and you are out."
218
"That isn't true," he cried, "thou sorceress!
False is the spirit of thy prophecy,
And all the priestly cunning you profess!
Your wickedness is plain and clear to see,
To stain a lady's name with falsity!
Away," he cried, "may Jove increase your sorrow,
For you are false today and false tomorrow!
219
"As well defame the beautiful Alceste,

And Mcleagre, lord of that contrec,
He lovede so this fresshe mayden free
That with his manhod, er he wolde stente,
This boor he slow, and hir the heed he sente;
212
Of which, as olde bokes tellen us,
Ther roos a contek and a greet envye;
And of this lord descended Tydeus
By ligne, or elles olde bokes lye;
But how this Meleagre gan to dye
Thorugh his moder, wol I yow not telle,
For al to long it were for to dwelle."
213
She tolde eek how Tydeus, er she stente,
Un-to the stronge citee of Thebes,
To cleyme kingdom of the citee, wente,
For his felawe, daun Polymites,
Of which the brother, daun Ethyocles,
Ful wrongfully of Thebes held the strengthe;
This tolde she by proces, al by lengthe.
214
She tolde eek how Hemonides asterte,
Whan Tydeus slough fifty knightes stoute.
She tolde eek al the prophesyes by herte,
And how that sevene kinges, with hir route,
Bisegeden the citee al aboute;
And of the holy serpent, and the welle,
And of the furies, al she gan him telle.
215
Of Archimoris buryinge and the pleyes,
And how Amphiorax fil through the grounde,
How Tydeus was slayn, lord of Argeyes,
And how Ypomedoun in litel stounde
Was dreynt, and deed Parthonope of wounde;
And also how Cappaneus the proude
With thonder-dint was slayn, that cryde loude.
216
She gan eek telle him how that either brother,
Ethyocles and Polimyte also,
At a scarmyche, eche of hem slough other,
And of Argyves wepinge and hir wo;
And how the town was brent she tolde eek tho.
And so descendeth doun from gestes olde
To Diomede, and thus she spak and tolde.
217
"This ilke boor bitokneth Diomede,
Tydeus sone, that doun descended is
Fro Meleagre, that made the boor to blede.
And thy lady, wher-so she be, y-wis,
This Diomede hir herte hath, and she his.
Weep if thou wolt, or leef; for, out of doute,
This Diomede is inne, and thou art oute."
218
"Thou seyst nat soth," quod he, "thou sorceresse,
With al thy false goost of prophesye!
Thou wenest been a greet devyneresse;
Now seestow not this fool of fantasye
Peyneth hir on ladyes for to lye?
Awey," quod he, "ther Joves yeve thee sorwe!
Thou shalt be fals, paraunter, yet to-morwe!
219
As wel thou mightest lyen on Alceste,

That was of creatures, but men lye,
That ever weren, kindest and the beste.
For whanne hir housbonde was in jupartye
To dye him-self, but-if she wolde dye,
She chees for him to dye and go to helle,
And starf anoon, as us the bokes telle."

Who was, unless all history doth lie,
Of human kind the truest and the best,
For when her husband was about to die,
Unless his place she would herself supply.
For him she chose to die and go to hell,
And in his stead, among the dead to dwell."

22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK V, STANZA 245 152a 
245
"Thou, Pandar, who didst often fret and chide,
Because my dreams seemed credible to me,
O, would that more on them I had relied,
For now you see your niece's falsity!
In sundry ways both joy and misery
The Gods reveal in sleep for our behoof,
And here my dreams provide for this a proof.
245
Pandare, that in dremes for to triste
Me blamed hast, and wont art ofte upbreyde,
Now maystow see thy-selve, if that thee liste,
How trewe is now thy nece, bright Criseyde!
In sondry formes, god it woot," he seyde,
"The goddes shewen bothe joye and tene
In slepe, and by my dreme it is now sene.

22 CHAUCER: Nun's Priest's Tale [14,898-15,162] 451a- 455b
Curteys she was, discreet, and debonaire,
And compaignable, and bar hir-self so faire,
Sin thilke day that she was seven night old,
That trewely she hath the herte in hold
Of Chauntecleer loken in every lith;
He loved hir so, that wel was him therwith.
But such a joye was it to here hem singe,
Whan that the brighte sonne gan to springe,
In swete accord, "my lief is faren in londe."
For thilke tyme, as I have understonde,
Bestes and briddes coude speke and singe.
And so bifel, that in a daweninge,
As Chauntecleer among his wyves alle
Sat on his perche, that was in the halle,
And next him sat this faire Pertelote,
This Chauntecleer gan gronen in his throte,
As man that in his dreem is drecched sore.
And whan that Pertelote thus herde him rore,
She was agast, and seyde, "O herte dere,
What eyleth yow, to grone in this manere?
Ye been a verray sleper, fy for shame!"
And he answerde and seyde thus, "madame,
I pray yow, that ye take it nat a-grief:
By god, me mette I was in swich meschief
Right now, that yet myn herte is sore afright.
Now god," quod he, "my swevene recche aright,
And keep my body out of foul prisoun!
Me mette, how that I romed up and doun
Withinne our yerde, wher-as I saugh a beste,
Was lyk an hound, and wolde han maad areste
Upon my body, and wolde han had me deed.
His colour was bitwixe yelwe and reed;
And tipped was his tail, and bothe his eres,
With blak, unlyk the remenant of his heres;
His snowte smal, with glowinge eyen tweye.
Yet of his look for fere almost I deye;
This caused me my groning, doutelees."
"Avoy!" quod she, "fy on yow, hertelees!
Alias!" quod she, "for, by that god above,
Now han ye lost myn herte and al my love;
I can nat love a coward, by my feith.
For certes, what so any womman seith,
We alle desyren, if it mighte be,
To han housbondes hardy, wyse, and free,
And secree, and no nigard, ne no fool,
Ne him that is agast of every tool,
Ne noon avauntour, by that god above!
How dorste ye seyn for shame unto your love,
That any thing mighte make yow aferd?
Have ye no mannes herte, and han a berd?
Alias! and conne ye been agast of swevenis?
No-thing, god wot, but vanitee, in sweven is.
Swevenes engendren of replecciouns,
And ofte of fume, and of complecciouns,
Whan humours been to habundant in a wight.
Certes this dreem, which ye han met to-night,
Cometh of the grete superfiuitee
Of youre rede colera, pardee,
Which causeth folk to dreden in here dremes
Of arwes, and of fyr with rede lemes,
Of grete bestes, that they wol hem byte,
Of contek, and of whelpes grete and lyte;

Courteous she was, discreet and debonnaire,
Companionable, and she had been so fair
Since that same day when she was seven nights old,
That truly she had taken the heart to hold
Of Chanticleer, locked in her every limb;
He loved her so that all was well with him.
But such a joy it was to hear them sing,
Whenever the bright sun began to spring,
In sweet accord, "My love walks through the land.'!
For at that time, and as I understand,
The beasts and all the birds could speak and sing.
So it befell that, in a bright dawning,
As Chanticleer 'midst wives and sisters all
Sat on his perch, the which was in the hall,
And next him sat the winsome Pertelote,
This Chanticleer he groaned within his throat
Like man that in his dreams is troubled sore.
And when fair Pertelote thus heard him roar,
She was aghast and said: "O sweetheart dear,
What ails you that you groan so ? Do you hear ?
You are a sleepy herald. Fie, for shame!"
And he replied to her thus: "Ah, madame,
I pray you that you take it not in grief:
By God, I dreamed I'd come to such mischief,
Just now, my heart yet jumps with sore affright.
Now God," cried he, "my vision read aright
And keep my body out of foul prison!
I dreamed, that while I wandered up and down
Within our yard, I saw there a strange beast
Was like a dog, and he'd have made a feast
Upon my body, and have had me dead.
His colour yellow was and somewhat red;
And tipped his tail was, as were both his ears,
With black, unlike the rest, as it appears;
His snout was small and gleaming was each eve.
Remembering how he looked, almost I die;
And all this caused my groaning, I confess."
"Aha," said she, "fie on you, spiritless!
Alas!" cried she, "for by that God above,
Now have you lost my heart and all my love;
I cannot love a coward, by my faith.
For truly, whatsoever woman saith,
We all desire, if only it may be,
To have a husband hardy, wise, and free,
And trustworthy, no niggard, and no fool,
Nor one that is afraid of every tool,
Nor yet a braggart, by that God above!
How dare you say, for shame, unto your love
That there is anything that you have feared ?
Have you not man's heart, and yet have a beard ?
Alas! And are you frightened by a vision ?
Dreams are, God knows, a matter for derision.
Visions are generated by repletions
And vapours and the body's bad secretions
Of humours overabundant in a wight.
Surely this dream, which you have had tonight,
Comes only of the superfluity
Of your bilious irascibility,
Which causes folk to shiver in their dreams
For arrows and for flames with long red gleams,
For great beasts in the fear that they will bite.
For quarrels and for wolf whelps great and slight;

Just as the humour of melancholy
Causes lull many a man, in sleep, to cry,
For tear of black bears or of bulls all black.
Or lest black devils put them in a sack.
Of other humours could I tell also,
That bring, to many a sleeping man, great woe;
But I'll pass on as lightly as I can.
"Lo, Cato, and he was a lull wise man.
Said he not, we should trouble not for dreams?
Now, sir," said she, "when we fly from the
beams, 
For Cod's love go and take some laxative;
On peril of my soul, and as I live,
I counsel you the best, I will not lie.
That both for choler and for melancholy
You purge yourself; and since you shouldn't tarry.
And on this farm there's no apothecary,
I will myself go find some herbs for you
That will be good for health and pecker too;
Ami in our own yard all these herbs I'll find,
The which have properties of proper kind
To purge von underneath and up above.
Forget this not, now, for Cod's very love!
You are so very choleric of complexion.
Beware the mounting sun and all dejection,
Nor get yourself with sudden humours hot;
For if you do, I dare well lay a groat
That you shall have the tertian fever's pain,
Or some ague that may well be your bane.
A day or two you shall have digestives
Of worms before you take your laxatives
Of laurel, centuary, and fumitory,
Or else of hellebore purificatory,
Or caper spurge, or else of dogwood berry,
Or herb ivy, all in our yard so merry;
Peck them just as they grow and gulp them in.
Be merry, husband, for your father's kin!
Dread no more dreams. And I can say no more."
"Madam," said he, "gramercy for your
lore.
Nevertheless, not running Cato down,
Who had for wisdom such a high renown,
And though he says to hold no dreams in dread,
By God, men have, in many old books, read
Of many a man more an authority
That ever Cato was, pray pardon me,
Who say just the reverse of his sentence,
And have found out by long experience
That dreams, indeed, are good significations,
As much of joys as of all tribulations
That folk endure here in this life present.
There is no need to make an argument;
The very proof of this is shown indeed.
"One of the greatest authors that men read
Says thus: That on a time two comrades went
On pilgrimage, and all in good intent;
And it so chanced they came into a town
Where there was such a crowding, up and down,
Of people, and so little harbourage,
That they found not so much as one cottage
Wherein the two of them might sheltered be.
Wherefore they must, as of necessity,

Right as the humour of malencolye
Causeth ful many a man, in sleep, to crye,
For fere of blake beres, or boles blake,
Or elles, blake develes wole hem take.
Of othere humours coude I telle also,
That werken many a man in sleep ful wo;
But I wol passe as lightly as I can.
Lo Catoun, which that was so wys a man,
Seyde he nat thus, ne do no fors of dremes?
Now, sire," quod she, "whan we flee fro the
bemes,
For Goddes love, as tak som laxatyf;
Up peril of my soule, and of my lyf,
I counseille yow the beste, I wol nat lye,
That bothe of colere and of malencolye
Ye purge yow; and for ye shul nat tarie,
Though in this toun is noon apotecarie,
I shal my-self to herbes techen yow,
That shul ben for your hele, and for your prow;
And in our yerd tho herbes shal I finde,
The whiche han of hir propretee, by kinde,
To purgen yow binethe, and eek above.
Forget not this, for goddes owene love!
Ye been ful colerik of compleccioun.
Ware the sonne in his ascencioun
Ne fynde yow nat repleet of humours hote;
And if it do, I dar wel leye a grote,
That ye shul have a fevere terciane,
Or an agu, that may be youre bane.
A day or two ye shul have digestyves
Of wormes, er ye take your laxatyves,
Of lauriol, centaure, and fumetere,
Or elles of ellebor, that groweth there.
Of catapuce, or of gaytres beryis,
Of erbe yve, growing in our yerd, that mery is;
Pekke hem up right as they growe, and ete hem in.
Be mery, housbond, for your fader kin!
Dredeth no dreem; I can say yow namore."
"Madame," quod he, "graunt mercy of your
lore.
But nathelees, as touching daun Catoun,
That hath of wisdom such a greet renoun,
Though that he bad no dremes for to drede,
By god, men may in olde bokes rede
Of many a man, more of auctoritee
Than ever Catoun was, so mote I thee,
That al the revers seyn of his sentence,
And han wel founden by experience,
That dremes ben significaciouns,
As wel of joye as tribulaciouns
That folk enduren in this lyf present.
Ther nedeth make of this noon argument;
The verray preve sheweth it in dede.
"Oon of the gretteste auctours that men rede
Seith thus, that whylom two felawes wente
On pilgrimage, in a ful good entente;
And happed so, thay come into a toun,
Wher-as ther was swich congregacioun
Of peple, and eek so streit of herbergage
That they ne founde as muche as o cotage
In which they bothe might y-logged be.
Wherfor thay mosten, of necessitee,

As for that night, departen compaignye;
And ech of hem goth to his hostelrye,
And took his logging as it wolde falle.
That oon of hem was logged in a stalle,
Fer in a yerd, with oxen of the plough;
That other man was logged wel y-nough,
As was his aventure, or his fortune,
That us governeth alle as in commune.
"And so bifel, that, longe er it were day,
This man mette in his bed, ther-as he lay,
How that his felawe gan up-on him calle,
And seyde, 'alias! for in an oxes stalle
This night I shal be mordred ther I lye.
Now help me, dere brother, er I dye;
In alle haste com to me,' he sayde.
This man out of his sleep for fere abrayde;
But whan that he was wakned of his sleep,
He turned him, and took of this no keep;
Him thoughte his dreem nas but a vanitee.
Thus twyes in his sleping dremed he.
And atte thridde tyme yet his felawe
Cam, as him thoughte, and seide, 'I am now
slawe;
Bihold my blody woundes, depe and wyde!
Arys up erly in the morwe-tyde,
And at the west gate of the toun,' quod he,
'A carte ful of dong ther shaltow see,
In which my body is hid ful prively;
Do thilke carte aresten boldely.
My gold caused my mordre, sooth to sayn';
And tolde him every poynt how he was slayn,
With a ful pitous face, pale of hewe.
And truste wel, his dreem he fond ful trewe;
For on the morwe, as sone as it was day,
To his felawes in he took the way;
And whan that he cam to this oxes stalle,
After his felawe he bigan to calle.
The hostiler answered him anon,
And seyde, 'sire, your felawe is agon,
As sone as day he wente out of the toun.'
This man gan fallen in suspecioun,
Remembring on his dremes that he mette,
And forth he goth, no bnger wolde he lette,
Unto the west gate of the toun, and fond
A dong-carte, as it were to donge lond,
That was arrayed in the same wyse
As ye han herd the dede man devyse;
And with an hardy herte he gan to crye
Vengeaunce and justice of this felonye:—
'My felawe mordred is this same night,
And in this carte he lyth gapinge upright.
I crye out on the ministres,' quod he,
'That sholden kepe and reulen this citee;
Harrow! alias! her lyth my felawe slayn!'
What sholde I more un-to this tale sayn?
The peple out-sterte, and caste the cart to
grounde,
And in the middel of the dong they founde
The dede man, that mordred was al newe.
O blisful god, that art so just and trewe!
Lo, how that thou biwreyest mordre alway!
Mordre wol out, that see we day by day.

For that one night at least, part company;
And each went to a different hostelry
And took such lodgment as to him did fall.
Now one oi them was lodged within a stall,
Far in a yard, with oxen of the plow;
That other man found shelter fair enow,
As was his luck, or was his good fortune,
Whatever 'tis that governs us, each one.
"So it befell that, long ere it was dav,
This last man dreamed in bed, as there he lay,
That his poor fellow did unto him call,
Saying: 'Alas! For in an ox's stall
This night shall 1 be murdered where I lie.
Now help me, brother dear, before I die.
Come in all haste to me.' 'Twas thus he said.
This man woke out of sleep, then, all alraid;
But when he'd wakened fully from his sleep,
He turned upon his pillow, yawning deep,
Thinking his dream was but a fantasy.
And then again, while sleeping, thus dreamed he.
And then a third time came a voice that said
(Or so he thought) : 'Now, comrade, I am
dead;
Behold my bloody wounds, so wide and deep!
Early arise tomorrow from your sleep,
And at the west gate of the town,' said he,
A wagon full of dung there shall you see,
Wherein is hid my body craftily;
Do you arrest this wagon right boldly.
They killed me for what money they could gain.
And told in every point how he'd been slain,
With a most pitiful face and pale of hue.
And trust me well, this dream did all come true;
For on the morrow, soon as it was day,
Unto his comrade's inn he took the way;
And when he'd come into that ox's stall,
Upon his fellow he began to call.
"The keeper of the place replied anon,
And said he: 'Sir, your friend is up and gone;
As soon as day broke he went out of town.'
This man, then, felt suspicion in him grown,
Remembering the dream that he had had,
And forth he went, no longer tarrying, sad,
Unto the west gate of the town, and found
A dung-cart on its way to dumping-ground,
And it was just the same in every wise
As you have heard the dead man advertise;
And with a hardy heart he then did cry
Vengeance and justice on this felony:
'My comrade has been murdered in the night,
And in this very cart lies, face upright.
I cry to all the officers,' said he
'That ought to keep the peace in this city.
Alas, alas, here lies my comrade slain!'
"Why should I longer with this tale detain ?
The people rose and turned the cart to
ground,
And in the center of the dung they found
The dead man, lately murdered in his sleep.
"O Blessed God, Who art so true and deep!
Lo, how Thou dost turn murder out alway!
Murder will out, we see it every day.

Murder's so hateful and abominable
To God, Who is so just and reasonable.
That He'll not suffer that it hidden be;
Though it may skulk a year, or two, or three
.
Murder will out, and I conclude thereon.
Immediately the rulers of that town,
They took the carter and so sore they racked
Him and the host, until their bones were cracked,
That they confessed their wickedness anon,
And hanged they both were by the neck, and soon.
"Here may men see that dreams are things to
dread.
And certainly, in that same book I read,
Right in the very chapter after this
(I spoof not, as I may have joy and bliss),
Of two men who would voyage oversea,
For some cause, and unto a far country,
If but the winds had not been all contrary,
Causing them both within a town to tarry,
Which town was builded near the haven-side.
But then, one day, along toward eventide,
The wind did change and blow as suited
best.
Jolly and glad they went unto their rest.
And were prepared right early for to sail;
But unto one was told a marvelous tale.
For one of them, a-sleeping as he lay,
Did dream a wondrous dream ere it was day,
He thought a strange man stood by his bedside
And did command him, he should there abide,
And said to him: 'If you tomorrow wend.
You shall be drowned; my tale is at an end.'
He woke and told his fellow what he'd met
And prayed him quit the voyage and forget;
For just one day he prayed him there to bide.
His comrade, who was lying there beside,
Began to laugh and scorned him long and fast.
'No dream,' said he, 'may make my heart aghast,
So that I'll quit my business for such things.
I do not care a straw for your dreamings,
For visions are but fantasies and japes.
Men dream, why, every day, of owls and apes,
And many a wild phantasm therewithal;
Men dream of what has never been, nor shall.
But since I see that you will here abide.
And thus forgo this fair wind and this tide,
God knows I'm sorry; nevertheless, good day!'
"And thus he took his leave and went his way.
But long before the half his course he'd sailed,
I know not why, nor what it was that failed,
But casually the vessel's bottom rent,
And ship and men under the water went,
In sight of other ships were there beside.
The which had sailed with that same wind and tide.
"And therefore, pretty Pertelote, my dear,
By such old-time examples may you hear
And learn that no man should be too reckless
Of dreams, for I can tell you, fair mistress,
That many a dream is something well to dread.
"Why in the 'Life' of Saint Kenelm I read
(Who was Kenelphus' son, the noble king
Of Mercia), how Kenelm dreamed a thing;

Mordre is so wlatsom and abhominable
To god, that is so just and resonable,
That he ne wol nat suffre it heled be;
Though it abyde a yeer, or two, or three,
Mordre wol out, this my conclusioun.
And right anoon, ministres of that toun
Han hent the carter, and so sore him pyned,
And eek the hostiler so sore engyned,
That thay biknewe hir wikkednesse anoon,
And were an-hanged by the nekke-boon.
Here may men seen that dremes been to
drede.
And certes, in the same book I rede,
Right in the nexte chapitre after this,
(I gabbe nat, so have I joye or blis,)
Two men that wolde han passed over see,
For certeyn cause, in-to a fer contree,
If that the wind ne hadde been contrarie,
That made hem in a citee for to tarie,
That stood ful mery upon an havensyde.
But on a day, agayn the even-tyde,
The wind gan chaunge, and blew right as hem
leste.
Jolif and glad they wente un-to hir reste,
And casten hem ful erly for to saille;
But to that 00 man fil a greet mervaille.
That oon of hem, in sleping as he lay,
Him mette a wonder dreem, agayn the day;
Him thoughte a man stood by his beddes syde,
And him comaunded, that he sholde abyde,
And seyde him thus, 'if thou to-morwe wende,
Thou shalt be dreynt; my tale is at an ende.'
He wook, and tolde his felawe what he mette,
And preyde him his viage for to lette;
As for that day, he preyde him to abyde.
His felawe, that lay by his beddes syde,
Gan for to laughe, and scorned him ful faste.
'No dreem,' quod he, 'may so myn herte agaste,
That I wol lette for to do my thinges.
I sette not a straw by thy dreminges,
For swevenes been but vanitees and japes.
Men dreme al-day of owles or of apes,
And eke of many a mase therwithal;
Men dreme of thing that never was ne shal.
But sith I see that thou wolt heer abyde,
And thus for-sleuthen wilfully thy tyde,
God wot it reweth me; and have good day.'
And thus he took his leve, and wente his way.
But er that he hadde halfe his cours y-seyled,
Noot I nat why, ne what mischaunce it eyled.
But casuelly the shippes botme rente,
And ship and man under the water wente
In sighte of othere shippes it byside,
That with hem seyled at the same tyde.
And therfor, faire Pertelote so dere,
By swiche ensamples olde maistow lere,
That no man sholde been to recchelees
Of dremes, for I sey thee, doutelees,
That many a dreem ful sore is for to drede.
Lo, in the lyf of seint Kenelm, I rede,
That was Kenulphus sone, the noble king
Of Mercenrike, how Kenelm mette a thing;

A lyte er he was mordred, on a day,
His mordre in his avisioun he say.
His norice him expouned every del
His sweven, and bad him for to kepe him wel
For traisoun; but he nas but seven yeer old,
And therfore litel tale hath he told
Of any dreem, so holy was his herte.
By god, I hadde lever than my sherte
That ye had rad his legende, as have I.
Dame Pertelote, I sey yow trewely,
Macrobeus, that writ th'avisioun
In Affrike of the worthy Cipioun,
Affermeth dremes, and seith that they been
Warning of thinges that men after seen.
And forther-more, I pray yow loketh wel
In th'olde testament, of Daniel,
If he held dremes any vanitee.
Jleed eek of Joseph, and ther shul ye see
Wher dremes ben somtyme (I sey nat alle)
Warning of thinges that shul after falle.
Loke of Egipt the king, daun Pharao,
His bakere and his boteler also,
Wher they ne felte noon effect in dremes.
Who-so wol seken actes of sondry remes,
May rede of dremes many a wonder thing.
Lo Cresus, which that was of Lyde king,
Mette he nat that he sat upon a tree,
Which signified he sholde anhanged be?
Lo heer Andromacha, Ectores wyf,
That day that Ector sholde lese his lyf,
She dremed on the same night biforn,
How that the lyf of Ector sholde be lorn,
If thilke day he wente in-to bataille;
She warned him, but it mighte nat availle;
He wente for to fighte nathelees,
But he was slayn anoon of Achilles.
But thilke tale is al to long to telle,
And eek it is ny day, I may nat dwelle.
Shortly I seye, as for conclusioun,
That I shal han of this avisioun
Adversitee; and I seye forther-more,
That I ne telle of laxatyves no store,
For they ben venimous, I woot it wel;
I hem defye, I love hem never a del.

A while ere he was murdered, so they say,
His own death in ;i vision saw , one day.
His nurse interpreted, as records tell,
That vision, bidding him to guard him well
From treason; but he was but seven years old,
And therefore 'twas but little he'd been told
Of any dream, so holy was his heart.
By God ! I'd rather than retain my shirt
That you had read this legend, as have I.
Dame Pertelote, I tell you verily,
Macrobius, who wrote of Scipio
The African a vision long ago,
He holds by dreams, saying that they have been
Warnings of things that men have later seen.
"And furthermore, I pray you to look well
In the Old Testament at Daniel,
Whether he held dreams for mere vanity.
Read, too, of Joseph, and you there shall see
Where dreams have sometimes been (I say not all)
Warnings of things that after did befall.
Consider Egypt's king, Dan Pharaoh,
His baker and his butler, these also,
Whether they knew of no effect from dreams.
Whoso will read of sundry realms the themes
May learn of dreams full many a wondrous thing.
Lo, Croesus, who was once of Lydia king,
Dreamed he not that he sat upon a tree,
Which signified that hanged high he should be ?
Lo, how Andromache, great Hector's wife,
On that same day when Hector lost his life,
She dreamed upon the very night before
That Hector's life should be lost evermore,
If on that day he battled, without fail.
She warned him, but no warning could avail;
He went to fight, despite all auspices,
And so was shortly slain by Achilles.
But that same tale is all too long to tell,
And, too, it's nearly day, I must not dwell
Upon this; I but say, concluding here,
That from this vision I have cause to fear
Adversity; and I say, furthermore,
That I do set by laxatives no store,
For they are poisonous, I know it well.
Them I defy and love not, truth to tell.




25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 533d-534a
Quis tumidum guttur miratur in Alpibus?⁵
than I regret that my duration shall not be as long and entire as that of an oak. 
I have no reason to complain of my imagination; I have had few thoughts in my life that 
have so much as broken my sleep, except those of desire, which have awakened without 
afflicting me. I dream but seldom, and then of chimaeras and fantastic things, commonly 
produced from pleasant thoughts, and rather ridiculous than sad; and I believe it to be 
true that dreams are faithful interpreters of our inclinations; but there is art required 
to sort and understand them:
⁵No one is surprised to see a goitre in the Alps.— Juvenal, xiii. 162,
Res, quae in vita usurpant homines,
cogitant, curant, vident,
Quaeque agunt vigilantes, agitantque,
ea si cui in somno accidunt,
Minus mirandum est.¹
Plato, moreover, says,² that 'tis the office of prudence to draw instructions of 
divination of future things from dreams : I don't know about this, but there are 
wonderful instances of it that Socrates, Xenophon, and Aristotle, men of irreproachable 
authority, relate. Historians say³ that the Atlantes never dream; who also never eat any 
animal food, which I add, forasmuch as it is, peradventure, the reason why they never 
dream, for Pythagoras ordered a certain preparation of diet to beget appropriate dreams. 
Mine are very gentle, without any agitation of body or expression of voice. I have seen 
several of my time wonderfully disturbed by them. Theon, the philosopher, walked in his 
sleep, and so did Pericles' servant, and that upon the tiles and top of the house.
¹‘Tis no wonder if what men practise, think, care for, see, and do when waking, should 
also run in their heads and disturb them when they are asleep.—Attius, in Cicero, De 
Divin., i. 22.
²In the Timaeus, 71.
³Herodotus, iv. 184.
















26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry VI, ACT I, SC II [17-55] 36c-37a / Richard III, ACT I, SC IV 
[1-74] 114d-115b / Romeo and Juliet, ACT I, SC IV [49-103] 291a-c / Midsummer-Night's 
Dream, ACT II, SC II [145-156] 360b-c / Julius Caesar, ACT II, SC II [58-107] 578d-579b
26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry VI, ACT I, SC II [17-55] 36c-37a
Glou. O Nell, sweet Nell, if thou dost love thy
lord.
Banish the canker of ambitious thoughts.
And may that thought, when I imagine ill
Against my king and nephew, virtuous Henry, 					20
Be my last breathing in this mortal world!
My troublous dream this night doth make me
sad.
Duch. What dream'd my lord? tell me, and I'll
requite it
With sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.
Glou. Methought this staff, mine office-badge in
court.
Was broke in twain; by whom I have forgot.
But, as I think, it was by the Cardinal;
And on the pieces of the broken wand
Were placed the heads of Edmund Duke of
Somerset,
And William de la Pole, first Duke of Suffolk.						30
This was my dream: what it doth bode, God
knows.
Duch. Tut, this was nothing but an argument
That he that breaks a stick of Gloucester's grove
Shall lose his head for his presumption.
But list to me, my Humphrey, my sweet duke:
Methought I sat in seat of majesty
In the cathedral church of Westminster,
And in that chair where kings and queens are
crown'd;
Where Henry and dame Margaret kneel 'd to me
And on my head did set the diadem. 						40
Glou. Nay, Eleanor, then must I chide outright:
Presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured Eleanor,
Art thou not second woman in the realm.
And the Protector's wife, beloved of him?
Hast thou not worldly pleasure at command.
Above the reach or compass of thy thought?
And wilt thou still be hammering treachery,
To tumble down thy husband and thyself
From top of honour to disgrace's feet?
Away from me, and let me hear no more!						50
Duch. What, what, my lord! are you so choleric
With Eleanor, for telling but her dream?
Next time I'll keep my dreams unto myself,
And not be check 'd.
Glou. Nay, be not angry; I am pleased again.

26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard III, ACT I, SC IV [1-74] 114d-115b 
Brak. Why looks your Grace so heavily to-day?
Clar. O, I have pass'd a miserable night,
So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night.
Though 'twere to buy a world of happy days,
So full of dismal terror was the time!
Brak. What was your dream? I long to hear
you tell it.
Clar. Methoughts that I had broken from the
Tower,
And was embark'd to cross to Burgundy; 						10
And, in my company, my brother Gloucester,
Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches : thence we look'd toward
England,
And cited up a thousand fearful times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster
That had befall'n us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled; and, in
falling.
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard.
Into the tumbling billows of the main. 						20
Lord, Lord! methought what pain it was to
drown!
What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!
What ugly sights of death within mine eyes!
Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks;
Ten thousand men that fishes gnaw'd upon;
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scatter'd in the bottom of the sea:
Some lay in dead men's skulls; and, in those holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept.
As 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems, 						31
Which woo'd the slimy bottom of the deep
And mock'd the dead bones that lay scatter'd by.
Brak. Had you such leisure in the time of
death
To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?
Clar. Methought I had; and often did I strive
To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood
Kept in my soul and would not let it forth
To seek the empty, vast, and wandering air;
But smother'd it within my panting bulk, 						40
Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.
Brak. Awaked you not with this sore agony?
Clar. O, no, my dream was lengthen'd after life;
O, then began the tempest to my soul.
Who pass'd, methought, the melancholy flood,
With that grim ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul
Was my great father-in-law, renowned
Warwick,
Who cried aloud, "What scourge for perjury						50
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?"
And so he vanish'd: then came wandering by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood; and he squeak'd out aloud,
"Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured
Clarence,
That stabb'd me in the field by Tewksbury;
Seize on him. Furies, take him to your torments!"
With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
Environ'd me about, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries that with the very noise 						60
I trembling waked, and for a season after
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made the dream.
Brak. No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted
you;
I promise you, I am afraid to hear you tell it.
Clar. O Brakenbury, I have done those things,
Which now bear evidence against my soul.
For Edward's sake; and see how he requites me!
God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee.
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds, 						70
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone,
O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me;
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.

26 SHAKESPEARE: Romeo and Juliet, ACT I, SC IV [49-103] 291a-c 
Rom. I dream'd a dream to-night.
Mer. And so did I. 								50
Rom. Well, what was yours?
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Rom. In bed asleep, while they do dream
things true.
Mer. O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with
you.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
In shape no bigger than an agate-stone
On the fore-finger of an alderman,
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Her waggon-spokes made of long spinners' legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,						60
The traces of the smallest spider's web.
The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,
Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,
Her waggoner a small grey-coated gnat,
Not half so big as a round little worm
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub.
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
And in this state she gallops night by night 						70
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of
love;
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies
straight.
O'er lawvers' fingers, who straight dream on
fees.
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted
are:
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose.
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep, 						80
Then dreams he of another benefice:
Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats.
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of healths five-fathom deep; and then anon
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
That plats the manes of horses in the night.
And bakes the elf-locks in foul sluttish hairs, 					
	90
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
Making them women of good carriage:
This is she—
Rom. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Mer. True, I talk of dreams.
Which are the children of an idle brain.
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy.
Which is as thin of substance as the air
And more inconstant than the wind, who
wooes
Even now the frozen bosom of the north, 						
101
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping south.

26 SHAKESPEARE: Midsummer-Night's Dream, ACT II, SC II [145-156] 360b-c 
Her. [Awaking] Help me, Lysander, help me!
do thy best
To pluck this crawling serpent from my breast!
Ay me, for pity! what a dream was here!
Lysander, look how I do quake with fear:
Methought a serpent eat my heart away.
And you sat smiling at his cruel prey. /50
Lysander! what, removed? Lysander! lord!
What, out of hearing? gone? no sound, no word?
Alack, where are you? speak, an if you hear;
Speak, of all loves! I swoon almost with fear.
No? then I well perceive you are not nigh:
Either death or you I'll find immediately. [Exit.

26 SHAKESPEARE: Julius Caesar, ACT II, SC II [58-107] 578d-579b
Dec. Caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy
Caesar:
I come to fetch you to the senate-house.
Cas. And you are come in very happy time, 						60
To bear my greeting to the senators
And tell them that I will not come to-day:
Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser:
I will not come to-day: tell them so, Decius.
Cal. Say he is sick.
Cces. Shall Caesar send a lie?
Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far,
To be afeard to tell graybeards the truth?
Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come.
Dec. Most mighty Caesar, let me know some
cause.
Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so. 						70
Cces. The cause is in my will: I will not come;
That is enough to satisfy the senate.
But for your private satisfaction,
Because I love you, I will let you know:
Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home:
She dreamt to-night she saw my statua,
Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,
Did run pure blood; and many lusty Romans
Came smiling and did bathe their hands in it:
And these does she apply for warnings, and
portents,									80
And evils imminent; and on her knee
Hath begg'd that I will stay at home to-day.
Dec. This dream is all amiss interpreted;
It was a vision fair and fortunate:
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes.
In which so many smiling Romans bathed.
Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck
Reviving blood, and that great men shall press
For tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
This by Calpurnia's dream is signified. 						90
Cas, And this way have you well expounded it.
Dec. I have, when you have heard what I can
say:
And know it now: the senate have concluded
To give this day a crown to mighty Cassar.
Ifyou shall send them word you will not come,
Their minds may change. Besides, it were a
mock
Apt to be render'd, for some one to say,
"Break up the senate till another time.
When Caesar's wife shall meet with better
dreams."
If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper 					100
"Lo, Caesar is afraid"?
Pardon me, Caesar; for my dear dear love
To your proceeding bids me tell you this;
And reason to my love is liable.
Cces. How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia!
I am ashamed I did yield to them.
Give me my robe, for I will go.



























27 SHAKESPEARE: Macbeth, ACT V, SC I 306b- 307a / Cymbeline, ACT V, SC IV [30-150] 481c- 
482c; SC V [426-485] 488b-d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Macbeth, ACT V, SC I 306b- 307a
ACT V
Scene I . Dunsinane: ante-room in the castle
Enter a doctor of physic and a waiting-gentlewoman.
Doct. I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your report. When 
was it she last walked?
Gent. Since his Majesty went into the field, I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her 
nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, 
afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while
in a most fast sleep. 									
			9
Doct. A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the 
effects of watching! In this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual 
performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?
Gent. That, sir, which I will not report after her.
Doct. You may to me; and 'tis most meet you should.
Gent. Neither to you nor any one; having no witness to confirm my speech. 		
				21
Enter lady macbeth, with a taper. 
Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe 
her; stand close.
Doct. How came she by that light?
Gent. Why, it stood by her. She has light by her continually; 'tis her command.
Doct. You see, her eyes are open.
Gent. Ay, but their sense is shut.
Doct. What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands. 				
			31
Gent. It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing her hands. I have known 
her continue in this a quarter of an hour. Lady M. Yet here's a spot.
Doct. Hark! she speaks. I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance 
the more strongly.
Lady M. Out, damned spot! out, I say! One; two. Why, then 'tis time to do't. Hell is 
murky! Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we fear who knows it, when 
none can call our power to account? Yet who would have thought the old man to have had so 
much blood in him.
Doct. Do you mark that?
Lady M. The thane of Fife had a wife. Where is she now? What, will these hands ne'er be 
clean? No more o' that, my lord, no more o' that! You mar all with this starting. 	
										50
Doct. Go to, go to; you have known what you should not.
Gent. She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that. Heaven knows what she has 
known. Lady M. Here's the smell of the blood still. All the perfumes of Arabia will not 
sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!
Doct. What a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged. 				
				60
Gent. I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.
Doct. Well, well, well—
Gent. Pray God it be, sir.
Doct. This disease is beyond my practice. Yet I have known those which have walked in 
their sleep who have died holily in their beds.
Lady M. Wash your hands, put on your nightgown; look not so pale. I tell you yet again, 
Banquo's buried; he cannot come out on's grave.
Doct. Even so? 										
			72
Lady M. To bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate. Come, come, come, come, give me 
your hand. What's done cannot be undone. To bed, to bed, to bed!
[Exit.
Doct. Will she go now to bed?
Gent. Directly.
Doct. Foul whisperings are abroad. Unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles. Infected minds 						
			80
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
More needs she the divine than the physician.
God, God forgive us all! Look after her;
Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night.
My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight.
I think, but dare not speak.
Gent. Good night, good doctor.
[Exeunt.

27 SHAKESPEARE: Cymbeline, ACT V, SC IV [30-150] 481c- 482c
No more, thou thunder-master, show 						30
Thy spite on mortal flies.
With Mars fall out, with Juno chide,
That thy adulteries
Rates and revenges.
Hath my poor boy done aught but well,
Whose face I never saw?
I died whilst in the womb he stay'd
Attending nature's law;
Whose father then, as men report
Thou orphans' fathei art, 								40
Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him
From this earth-vexing smart.
Moth. Lucina lent not me her aid,
But took me in my throes;
That from me was Posthumus ript,
Came crying 'mongst his foes,
A thing of pity!
Sici. Great nature, like his ancestry,
Moulded the stuff so fair,
That he deserved the praise o' the world,
As great Sicilius' heir. 								51
1st Bro. When once he was mature for man,
In Britain where was he
That could stand up his parallel;
Or fruitful object be
In eye of Imogen, that best
Could deem his dignity?
Moth. With marriage wherefore was he mock'd,
To be exiled, and thrown
From Leonati seat, and cast 							60
From her his dearest one,
Sweet Imogen?
Sici. Why did you suffer Iachimo,
Slight thing of Italy,
To taint his nobler heart and brain
With needless jealousy;
And to become the geek and scorn
O' th' other's villainy?
2nd Bro. For this from stiller seats we came,
Oar parents and us twain, 								70
That striking in our country's cause
Fell bravely and were slain,
Our fealty and Tenantius' right
With honour to maintain.
1st Bro. Like hardiment Posthumus hath
To Cymbeline perform'd.
Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods,
Why hast thou thus adjourn'd
The graces for his merits due,
Being all to dolours turn'd? 							80
Sici. Thy crystal window ope; look out;
No longer exercise
Upon a valiant race thy harsh
And potent injuries.
Moth. Since, Jupiter, our son is good,
Take off his miseries.
Ski. Peep through thy marble mansion; help;
Or we poor ghosts will cry
To the shining synod of the rest
Against thy deity.									90
Both Bro. Help, Jupiter; or we appeal,
And from thy justice fly.
jupiter descends in thunder and lightning, sitting
upon an eagle; he throws a thunderbolt. The
Ghostsfall on their knees.
fup. No more, you petty spirits ofregion low,
Offend our hearing; hush! How dare you ghosts
Accuse the thunderer, whose bolt, you know,
Sky-planted batters all rebelling coasts?
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest
Upon your never-withering banks of flowers.
Be not with mortal accidents opprest;
No care of yours it is; you know 'tis ours.						
100
Whom best I love I cross; to make my gift,
The more delay'd, delighted. Be content;
Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift.
His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent.
Our Jovial star reign'd at his birth, and in
Our temple was he married. Rise, and fade.
He shall be lord of lady Imogen,
And happier much by his affliction made.
This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein
Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine.						
110
And so, away! No further with your din
Express impatience, lest you stir up mine.
Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline.
[Ascends.
Ski. He came in thunder; his celestial breath
Was sulphurous to smell. The holy eagle
Stoop'd, as to foot us. His ascension is
More sweet than our blest fields. His royal bird
Prunes the immortal wing and cloys his beak,
As when his god is pleased.
All. Thanks, Jupiter!
Ski. The marble pavement closes, he is
enter'd 										
120
His radiant roof. Away! and, to be blest,
Let us with care perform his great behest.
[The Ghosts vanish.
Post. [Waking] Sleep, thou hast been a grandsire
and begot
A father to me; and thou hast created
A mother and two brothers; but, O scorn!
Gone! they went hence so soon as they were
born.
And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend
On greatness' favour dream as I have done,
Wake and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve.
Many dream not to find, neither deserve, 						
130
And yet are steep'd in favours; so am I,
That have this golden chance and know not why.
What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare
one!
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment
Nobler than that it covers! Let thy effects
So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers,
As good as promise.
[Reads] "When as a lion's whelp shall, to himself
unknown, without seeking find, and be embraced
by a piece of tender air; and when from a
stately cedar shall be lopped branches, which,
being dead many years, shall after revive, be
jointed to the old stock and freshly grow; then
shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be
fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty."
'Tis still a dream or else such stuff as madmen
Tongue and brain not; either both or nothing;
Or senseless speaking or a speaking such
As sense cannot untie. Be what it is,
The action of my life is like it, which 						
150
I'll keep, if but for sympathy.

27 SHAKESPEARE: Cymbeline, ACT V, SC V [426-485] 488b-d
Call forth your soothsayer. As I slept, methought
Great Jupiter, upon his eagle back'd,
Appear'd to me, with other spritely shows
Of mine own kindred. When I waked, I found
This label on my bosom; whose containing 						
430
Is so from sense in hardness, that I can
Make no collection of it. Let him show
His skill in the construction.
Luc. Philarmonus!
Sooth. Here, my good lord.
Luc. Read, and declare the meaning.
Sooth. [Reads] "When as a lion's whelp shall,
to himself unknown, without seeking find, and be
embraced by a piece of tender air; and when
from a stately cedar shall be lopped branches,
which, being dead many years, shall after revive,
be jointed to the old stock, and freshly grow;
then shall Posthumus end his miseries, Britain be
fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty."
Thou, Leonatus, art the lion's whelp;
The fit and apt construction of thy name,
Being leo-natus, doth import so much.
[To cymbeline] The piece offender air, thy
virtuous daughter,
Which we call mollis aer; and mollis aer
We term it mulier; which mul'ier I divine
Is this most constant wife; who, even now,
Answering the letter of the oracle,							 
450
Unknown to you, unsought, were clipp'd about
With this most tender air.
Cym. This hath some seeming.
Sooth. The lofty cedar, royal Cymbeline,
Personates thee; and thy lopp'd branches point
Thy two sons forth; who, by Belarius stol'n,
For many years thought dead, are now revived,
To the majestic cedar join'd, whose issue
Promises Britain peace and plenty.
Cym. Well;
My peace we will begin. And, Caius Lucius,
Although the victor, we submit to Caesar, 						
460
And to the Roman empire; promising
To pay our wonted tribute, from the which
We were dissuaded by our wicked queen;
Whom heavens, in justice, both on her and hers,
Have laid most heavy hand.
Sooth. The fingers of the powers above do tune
The harmony of this peace. The vision
Which I made known to Lucius, ere the stroke
Of this yet scarce-cold battle, at this instant
Is full accomplish'd; for the Roman eagle, 						
470
From south to west on wing soaring aloft,
Lessen'd herself, and in the beams o' the sun
So vanish'd; which foreshow'd our princely eagle,
The imperial Caesar, should again unite
His favour with the radiant Cymbeline,
Which shines here in the west.
Cym. Laud we the gods;
And let our crooked smokes climb to their
nostrils
From our blest altars. Publish we this peace
To all our subjects. Set we forward. Let
A Roman and a British ensign wave 							
480
Friendly together. So through Lud's-town march;
And in the temple of great Jupiter
Our peace we'll ratify; seal it with feasts.
Set on there! Never was a war did cease,
Ere bloody hands were wash'd, with such a
peace. 											
		[Exeunt.


















32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK V [28-128] 176a-178a esp [100-109] 177b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK V [28-128] 176a-178a 
O Sole in whom my thoughts find all repose,
My Glorie, my Perfection, glad I see
Thy face, and Morn return'd, for I this Night, 					30
Such night till this I never pass'd, have dream'd,
If dream'd, not as I oft am wont, of thee,
Works of day pass't, or morrows next designe,
But of offence and trouble, which my mind
Knew never till this irksom night; methought
Close at mine ear one call'd me forth to walk
With gentle voice, I thought it thine; it said,
Why sleepst thou Eve? now is the pleasant time,
The cool, the silent, save where silence yields
To the night-warbling Bird, that now awake 						40
Tunes sweetest his love-labor'd song; now reignes
Full Orb'd the Moon, and with more pleasing light
Shadowie sets off the face of things; in vain,
If none regard; Heav'n wakes with all his eyes,
Whom to behold but thee, Natures desire,
In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment
Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.
I rose as at thy call, but found thee not;
To find thee I directed then my walk;
And on, methought, alone I pass'd through ways 					50
That brought me on a sudden to the Tree
Of interdicted Knowledge: fair it seem'd,
Much fairer to my Fancie then by day:
And as I wondring lookt, beside it stood
One shap'd and wing'd like one of those from Heav'n
By us oft seen; his dewie locks distill'd
Ambrosia; on that Tree he also gaz'd;
And O fair Plant, said he, with fruit surcharg'd,
Deigns none to ease thy load and taste thy sweet,
Nor God, nor Man; is Knowledge so despis'd? 					60
Or envie, or what reserve forbids to taste?
Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold
Longer thy ofTerd good, why else set here?
This said he paus'd not, but with ventrous Arme
He pluckt, he tasted; mee damp horror chil'd
At such bold words voucht with a deed so bold:
But he thus overjoy'd, O Fruit Divine,
Sweet of thy self, but much more sweet thus cropt,
Forbidd'n here, it seems, as onely fit
For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men: 						70
And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant growes,
The Author not impair'd, but honourd more?
Here, happie Creature, fair Angelic Eve,
Partake thou also; happie though thou art,
Happier thou mayst be, worthier canst not be:
Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods
Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind,
But somtimes in the Air, as wee, somtimes
Ascend to Heav'n, by merit thine, and see 						80
What life the Gods live there, and such live thou.
So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held,
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part
Which he had pluckt; the pleasant savourie smell
So quick'nd appetite, that I, methought,
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the Clouds
With him I flew, and underneath beheld
The Earth outstretcht immense, a prospect wide
And various: wondring at my flight and change
To this high exaltation; suddenly 							90
My Guide was gon, and I, me thought, sunk down,
And fell asleep; but O how glad I wak'd
To find this but a dream! Thus Eve her Night
Related, and thus Adam answerd sad.
Best Image of my self and dearer half,
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep
Affects me equally; nor can I like
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung I fear;
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none,
Created pure. But know that in the Soule 						
100
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fansie next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,
She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,
Which Reason joyning or disjoyning, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell when Nature rests.
Oft in her absence mimic Fansie wakes 						110
To imitate her; but misjoyning shapes,
Wilde work produces oft, and most in dreams,
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late.
Som such resemblances methinks I find
Of our last Eevnings talk, in this thy dream,
But with addition strange; yet be not sad.
Evil into the mind of God or Man
May come and go, so unapprov'd, and leave
No spot or blame behind: Which gives me hope
That what in sleep thou didst abhorr to dream, 					120
Waking thou never wilt consent to do:
Be not disheart'nd then, nor cloud those looks
That wont to be more chearful and serene
Then when fair Morning first smiles on the World,
And let us to our fresh imployments rise
Among the Groves, the Fountains, and the Flours
That open now thir choicest bosom'd smells
Reservd from night, and kept for thee in store.


32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK V esp [100-109] 177b
Created pure. But know that in the Soule 						
100
Are many lesser Faculties that serve
Reason as chief; among these Fansie next
Her office holds; of all external things,
Which the five watchful Senses represent,
She forms Imaginations, Aerie shapes,
Which Reason joyning or disjoyning, frames
All what we affirm or what deny, and call
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires
Into her private Cell when Nature rests.



























46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 263d-265c
In tracing up the rudiments of Greek culture, we first recall attention to the fact, that 
the physical condition of the country does not exhibit such a characteristic unity, such 
a uniform mass, as to exercise a powerful influence over the inhabitants. On the 
contrary, it is diversified, and produces no decided impression. Nor have we here the 
unwieldy unity of a family or national combination; but, in the presence of scenery and 
displays of elemental power broken up into fragmentary forms, men's attention is more 
largely directed to themselves, and to the extension of their immature capabilities. Thus 
we see the Greeks, divided and separated from each other, thrown back upon their inner 
spirit and personal energy, yet at the same time most variously excited and cautiously 
circumspect. We behold them quite undetermined and irresolute in the presence of nature, 
dependent on its contingencies, and listening anxiously to each signal from the external 
world; but, on the other hand, intelligently taking cognizance of and appropriating that 
outward existence, and showing boldness and independent vigour in contending with it. 
These are the simple elements of their culture and religion. In tracing up their 
mythological conceptions, we find natural objects forming the basis—not en masse, 
however; only in dissevered forms. The Diana of Ephesus (that is, nature as the universal 
mother), the Cybele and Astarte of Syria—such comprehensive conceptions remained 
Asiatic, and were not transmitted to Greece. For the Greeks only watch the objects of 
nature, and form surmises respecting them ; inquiring, in the depth of their souls, for 
the hidden meaning. According to Aristotle's dictum, that philosophy proceeds from 
wonder, the Greek view of nature also proceeds from wonder of this kind. Not that in 
their experience, spirit meets something extraordinary, which it compares with the common 
order of things; for the intelligent view of a regular course of nature, and the 
reference of phenomena to that standard, do not yet present themselves ; but the Greek 
spirit was excited to wonder at the natural in nature. It does not maintain the position 
of stupid indifference to it as something existing, and there an end of it ; but regards 
it as something in the first instance foreign, in which, however, it has a presentiment 
of confidence, and the belief that it bears something within it which is friendly to the 
human spirit, and to which it may be permitted to sustain a positive relation. This 
wonder, and this presentiment, are here the fundamental categories; though the Hellenes 
did not content themselves with these moods of feelings but projected the hidden meaning, 
which was the subject of the surmise, into a distinct conception as an object of 
consciousness. The natural holds its place in their minds only after undergoing some 
transformation by spirit—not immediately. Man regards nature only as an excitement to 
his faculties, and only the spiritual which he has evolved from it can have any influence 
over him. Nor is this commencement of the spiritual apprehension of nature to be regarded 
as an explanation suggested by us; it meets us in a multitude of conceptions formed by 
the Greeks themselves. The position of curious surmise, of attentive eagerness to catch 
the meaning of nature, is indicated to us in the comprehensive idea of Pan. To the 
Greeks, Pan did not represent the objective whole, but that indefinite neutral ground 
which involves the element of the subjective ; he embodies that thrill which pervades us 
in the silence of the forests; he was, therefore, especially worshipped in sylvan 
Arcadia: (a "panic terror" is the common expression for a groundless fright). Pan, this 
thrill-exciting being, is also represented as playing on the flute ; we have not the bare 
internal presentiment, for Pan makes himself audible on the seven-reeded pipe. In what 
has been stated we have, on the one hand, the indefinite, which, however, holds 
communication with man; on the other hand, the fact that such communication is only a 
subjective imagining, an explanation furnished by the percipient himself. On the same 
principle the Greeks listened to the murmuring of the fountains, and asked what might be 
thereby signified; but the signification which they were led to attach to it was not the 
objective meaning of the fountain, but the subjective—that of the subject itself, which 
further exalts the Naiad to a Muse. The naiads, or fountains, are the external, objective 
origin of the Muses. Yet the immortal songs of the Muses are not that which is heard in 
the murmuring of the fountains; they are the productions of the thoughtfully listening 
spirit, creative while observant. The interpretation and explanation of nature and its 
transformations, the indication of their sense and import, is the act of the subjective 
spirit; and to this the Greeks attached the name μαντεία. The general idea which 
this embodies, is the form in which man realizes his relationship to nature. 
Μαντεία has reference both to the matter of the exposition and to the expounder 
who divines the weighty import in question. Plato speaks of it in reference to dreams, 
and to that delirium into which men fall during sickness; an interpreter, μαντιϛ, 
is wanted to explain these dreams and this delirium. That nature answered the questions 
which the Greek put to her, is in this converse sense true, that he obtained an answer to 
the questions of nature from his own spirit. The insight of the seer becomes thereby 
purely poetical; spirit supplies the signification which the natural image expresses. 
Everywhere the Greeks desired a clear presentation and interpretation of the natural. 
Homer tells us, in the last book of the Odyssey, that while the Greeks were overwhelmed 
with sorrow for Achilles, a violent agitation came over the sea: the Greeks were on the 
point of dispersing in terror, when the experienced Nestor arose and interpreted the 
phenomenon to them. Thetis, he said, was coming, with her nymphs, to lament for the death 
of her son. When a pestilence broke out in the camp of the Greeks, the priest, Calchas, 
explained that Apollo was incensed at their not having restored the daughter of his 
priest Chryses when a ransom had been offered. The oracle was originally interpreted 
exactly in this way. The oldest oracle was at Dodona, (in the district of the modern 
Janina). Herodotus says that the first priestesses of the temple there, were from Egypt; 
yet this temple is stated to be an ancient Greek one. The rustling of the leaves of the 
sacred oaks was the form of prognostication there. Bowls of metal were also suspended in 
the grove. But the sounds of the bowls dashing against each other were quite indefinite, 
and had no objective sense ; the sense, the signification, was imparted to the sounds 
only by the human beings who heard them. Thus also the Delphic priestesses, in a 
senseless, distracted state, in the intoxication of enthusiasm (μανία), uttered 
unintelligible sounds; and it was the μαντιϛ who gave to these utterances a 
definite meaning. In the cave of Trophonius the noise of subterranean waters was heard, 
and apparitions were seen : but these indefinite phenomena acquired a meaning only 
through the interpreting, comprehending spirit. It must also be observed, that these 
excitements of spirit are in the first instance external, natural impulses. Succeeding 
them are internal changes taking place in the human being himself—such as dreams, or 
the delirium of the Delphic priestess—which require to be made intelligible by the 
μαντιϛ. At the commencement of the Iliad, Achilles is excited against Agamemnon, 
and is on the point of drawing his sword ; but on a sudden he checks the movement of his 
arm, and recollects himself in his wrath, reflecting on his relation to Agamemnon. The 
poet explains this by saying that it was Pallas-Athene (wisdom or consideration) that 
restrained him. When Ulysses among the Phaeacians, has thrown his discus farther than the 
rest, and one of the Phaeacians shows a friendly disposition towards him, the poet 
recognizes in him Pallas-Athene. Such an explanation denotes the perception of the inner 
meaning, the sense, the underlying truth; and the poets were in this way the teachers of 
the Greeks —especially Homer. Μαντεία in fact is poesy, not a capricious 
indulgence of fancy, but an imagination which introduces the spiritual into the 
natural—in short, a richly intelligent perception. The Greek spirit, on the whole, 
therefore, is free from superstition, since it changes the sensuous into the 
sensible—the intellectual, so that decisions are derived from spirit; although 
superstition comes in again from another quarter, as will be observed when impulsions 
from another source than the spiritual, are allowed to tell upon opinion and action.
But the stimuli that operated on the spirit of the Greeks are not to be limited to these 
objective and subjective excitements. The traditional element derived from foreign 
countries, the culture, the divinities and ritual observances transmitted to them ab 
extra must also be included. It has been long a much vexed question whether the arts and 
the religion of the Greeks were developed independently or through foreign suggestion. 
Under the conduct of a one sided understanding the controversy is interminable; for it is 
no less a fact of history that the Greeks derived conceptions from India, Syria, and 
Egypt, than that the Greek conceptions are peculiar to themselves, and those others 
alien. Herodotus (II. 53) asserts, with equal decision, that "Homer and Hesiod invented a 
theogony for the Greeks, and assigned to the gods their appropriate epithets" (a most 
weighty sentence, which has been the subject of deep investigation, especially by 
Creuzer), and in another place, that Greece took the names of its divinities from Egypt, 
and that the Greeks made inquiry at Dodona, whether they ought to adopt these names or 
not. This appears self-contradictory: it is, however, quite consistent; for the fact is 
that the Greeks evolved the spiritual from the materials which they had received. The 
natural, as explained by man — i.e., its internal essential element—is, as a 
universal principle, the beginning of the divine. Just as in art the Greeks may have 
acquired a mastery of technical matters from others, from the Egyptians especially, so in 
their religion the commencement might have been from without; but by their independent 
spirit they transformed the one as well as the other.















48 MELVILLE: Moby Dick, 19a-20a
Chapter 4
The Counterpane
Upon waking next morning about daylight, I found Queequeg's arm thrown over me in the 
most loving and affectionate manner. You had almost thought I had been his wife. The 
counterpane was of patchwork, full of odd little parti-coloured squares and triangles; 
and this arm of his tattooed all over with an interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure, 
no two parts of which were of one precise shade—owing I suppose to his keeping his arm 
at sea unmethodically in sun and shade, his shirt-sleeves irregularly rolled up at 
various times—this same arm of his, I say, looked for all the world like a strip of 
that same patchwork quilt. Indeed, partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke, 
I could hardly tell it from the quilt, they so blended their hues together; and it was 
only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that Queequeg was hugging me.
My sensations were strange. Let me try to explain them. When I was a child, I well 
remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me; whether it was a reality or a 
dream, I never could entirely settle. The circumstance was this. I had been cutting up 
some caper or other—I think it was trying to crawl up the chimney, as I had seen a 
little sweep do a few days previous; and my stepmother who, somehow or other, was all the 
time whipping me, or sending me to bed supperless,—my stepmother dragged me by the legs 
out of the chimney and packed me off to bed, though it was only two o'clock in the 
afternoon of the 21st June, the longest day in the year in our hemisphere. I felt 
dreadfully. But there was no help for it, so upstairs I went to my little room in the 
third floor, undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time, and with a bitter 
sigh got between the sheets.
I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before I could 
hope to get out of bed again. Sixteen hours in bed! the small of my back ached to think 
of it. And it was so light too; the sun shining in at the window, and a great rattling of 
coaches in the streets, and the sound of gay voices all over the house. I felt worse and 
worse—at last I got up, dressed, and softly going down in my stockinged feet, sought 
out my stepmother, and suddenly threw myself at her feet, beseeching her as a particular 
favour to give me a good slippering for my misbehaviour; anything indeed but condemning 
me to lie abed such an unendurable length of time. But she was the best and most 
conscientious of stepmothers, and back I had to go to my room. For several hours I lay 
there broad awake, feeling a great deal worse than I have ever done since, even from the 
greatest sub sequent misfortunes. At last I must have fallen into a troubled nightmare of 
a doze; and slowly waking from it—half steeped in dreams—I opened my eyes, and the 
before sunlit room was now wrapped in outer darkness. Instantly I felt a shock running 
through all my frame; nothing was to be seen, and nothing was to be heard; but a 
supernatural hand seemed placed in mine. My arm hung over the counterpane, and the 
nameless, unimaginable, silent form or phantom, to which the hand belonged, seemed 
closely seated by my bedside. For what seemed ages piled on ages, I lay there, frozen 
with the most awful fears, not daring to drag away my hand; yet ever thinking that if I 
could but stir it one single inch, the horrid spell would be broken. I knew not how this 
consciousness at last glided away from me; but waking in the morning, I shudderingly 
remembered it all, and for days and weeks and months afterwards I lost myself in 
confounding attempts to explain the mystery. Nay, to this very hour, I often puzzle 
myself with it.
Now, take away the awful fear, and my sensations at feeling the supernatural hand in mine 
were very similar, in their strangeness, to those which I experienced on waking up and 
seeing Queequeg's pagan arm thrown round me. But at length all the past night's events 
soberly recurred, one by one, in fixed reality, and then I lay only alive to the comical 
predicament. For though I tried to move his arm—unlock his clasp—yet, sleeping as he 
was, he still hugged me tightly, as though naught but death should part us twain. I now 
strove to rouse him—"Queequeg!"—but his only answer was a snore. I then rolled over, 
my neck feeling as if it were in a horse-collar; and suddenly felt a slight scratch. 
Throwing aside the counterpane, there lay the tomahawk sleeping by the savage's side, as 
if it were a hatchet-faced baby. A pretty pickle, truly, thought I: abed here in a 
strange house in the broad day, with a cannibal and a tomahawk! "Queequeg!— in the name 
of goodness, Queequeg, wake!" At length, by dint of much wriggling, and loud and 
incessant expostulations upon the unbecomingness of his hugging a fellow male in that 
sort of style, I succeeded in extracting a grunt; and presently, he drew back his arm, 
shook himself all over like a Newfoundland dog just from the water, and sat up in bed, 
stiff as a pike-staff, looking at me, and rubbing his eyes as if he did not altogether 
remember how I came to be there, though a dim consciousness of knowing something about me 
seemed slowly dawning over him. Meanwhile, I lay quietly eyeing him, having no serious 
misgivings now, and bent upon narrowly observing so curious a creature. When, at last, 
his mind seemed made up touching the character of his bedfellow, and he became, as it 
were, reconciled to the fact; he jumped out upon the floor, and by certain signs and 
sounds gave me to understand that, if It pleased me he would dress first and then leave 
me to dress afterwards, leaving the whole apartment to myself. Thinks I, Queequeg, under 
the circumstances, this is a very civilised overture; but, the truth is, these savages 
have an innate sense of delicacy, say what you will; it is marvellous how essentially 
polite they are. I pay this particular compliment to Queequeg, because he treated me with 
so much civility and consideration, while I was guilty or great rudeness; staring at him 
from the bed, and watching all his toilet motions: for the time my curiosity getting the 
better of my breeding. Nevertheless, a man like Queequeg you don't see every day, he and 
his ways were well worth unusual regarding.
































51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK II, 86a; BK VI, 249a-250a; BK XI, 481a-482a; BK XII, 
561b-562a; BK XIV, 608a-b; EPILOGUE I, 673d- 674a,c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK II, 86a
France and projects for peace, a secret peace concluded separately."
"Impossible!" cried Prince Andrew. "That would be too base."
"If we live we shall see," replied Bilibin, his face again becoming smooth as a sign that 
the conversation was at an end.
When Prince Andrew reached the room prepared for him and lay down in a clean shirt on the 
feather bed with its warmed and fragrant pillows, he felt that the battle of which he had 
brought tidings was far, far away from him. The alliance with Prussia, Austria's 
treachery, Bonaparte's new triumph, tomorrow's levee and parade, and the audience with 
the Emperor Francis occupied his thoughts.
He closed his eyes, and immediately a sound of cannonading, of musketry and the rattling 
of carriage wheels seemed to fill his ears, and now again drawn out in a thin line the 
musketeers were descending the hill, the French were firing, and he felt his heart 
palpitating as he rode forward beside Schmidt with the bullets merrily whistling all 
around, and he experienced tenfold the joy of living, as he had not done since childhood. 
He woke up . . . 
"Yes, that all happened!" he said, and, smiling happily to himself like a child, he fell 
into a deep, youthful slumber.

51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK VI, 249a-250a
3rd December
Awoke late, read the Scriptures but was apathetic. Afterwards went and paced up and down 
the large hall. I wished to meditate, but instead my imagination pictured an occurrence 
of four years ago, when Dolokhov, meeting me in Moscow after our duel, said he hoped I 
was enjoying perfect peace of mind in spite of my wife's absence. At the time I gave him 
no answer. Now I recalled every detail of that meeting and in my mind gave him the most 
malevolent and bitter replies. I recollected myself and drove away that thought only when 
I found myself glowing with anger, but I did not sufficiently repent. Afterwards Boris 
Drubetskoy came and began relating various adventures. His coming vexed me from the 
first, and I said something disagreeable to him. He replied. I flared up and said much 
that was unpleasant and even rude to him. He became silent, and I recollected myself only 
when it was too late. My God, I cannot get on with him at all. The cause of this is my 
egotism. I set myself above him and so become much worse than he, for he is lenient to my 
rudeness while I on the contrary nourish contempt for him. O God, grant that in his 
presence I may rather see my own vileness, and behave so that he too may benefit. After 
dinner I fell asleep and as I was drowsing off I clearly heard a voice saying in my left 
ear, "Thy day!"
I dreamed that I was walking in the dark and was suddenly surrounded by dogs, but I went 
on undismayed. Suddenly a smallish dog seized my left thigh with its teeth and would not 
let go. I began to throttle it with my hands. Scarcely had I torn it off before another, 
a bigger one, began biting me. I lifted it up, but the higher I lifted it the bigger and 
heavier it grew. And suddenly Brother A. came and, taking my arm, led me to a building to 
enter which we had to pass along a narrow plank. I stepped on it, but it bent and gave 
way and I began to clamber up a fence which I could scarcely reach with my hands. After 
much effort I dragged myself up, so that my legs hung down on one side and my body on the 
other. I looked round and saw Brother A. standing on the fence and pointing me to a broad 
avenue and garden, and in the garden was a large and beautiful building. I woke up. O 
Lord, great Architect of Nature, help me to tear from myself these dogs—my passions— 
especially the last, which unites in itself the strength of all the former ones, and aid 
me to enter that temple of virtue to a vision of which I attained in my, dream.
7th December
I dreamed that Joseph Alexeevich was sitting in my house, and that I was very glad and 
wished to entertain him. It seemed as if I chattered incessantly with other people and 
suddenly remembered that this could not please him, and I wished to come close to him and 
embrace him. But as soon as I drew near I saw that his face had changed and grown young, 
and he was quietly telling me something about the teaching of our order, but so softly 
that I could not hear it. Then it seemed that we all left the room and something strange 
happened. We were sitting or lying on the floor. He was telling me something, and I 
wished to show him my sensibility, and not listening to what he was saying I began 
picturing to myself the condition of my inner man and the grace of God sanctifying me. 
And tears came into my eyes, and I was glad he noticed this. But he looked at me with 
vexation and jumped up, breaking off his remarks. I felt abashed and asked whether what 
he had been saying did not concern me; but he did not reply, gave me a kind look, and 
then we suddenly found ourselves in my bedroom where there is a double bed. He lay down 
on the edge of it and I burned with longing to caress him and lie down too. And he said, 
"Tell me frankly what is your chief temptation? Do you know it? I think you know it 
already." Abashed by this question, I replied that sloth was my chief temptation. He 
shook his head incredulously; and even more abashed, I said that though I was living with 
my wife as he advised, I was not living with her as her husband. To this he replied that 
one should not deprive a wife of one's embraces and gave me to understand that that was 
my duty. But I replied that I should be ashamed to do it, and suddenly everything 
vanished. And I awoke and found in my mind the text from the Gospel: "The life was the 
light of men. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not." 
Joseph Alexeevich's face had looked young and bright. That day I received a letter from 
my benefactor in which he wrote about "conjugal duties."
9th December
I had a dream from which I awoke with a throbbing heart. I saw that I was in Moscow in my 
house, in the big sitting room, and Joseph Alexeevich came in from the drawing room. I 
seemed to know at once that the process of regeneration had already taken place in him, 
and I rushed to meet him. I embraced him and kissed his hands, and he said, "Hast thou 
noticed that my face is different?" I looked at him, still holding him in my arms, and 
saw that his face was young, but that he had no hair on his head and his features were 
quite changed. And I said, "I should have known you had I met you by chance," and I 
thought to myself, "Am I telling the truth?" And suddenly I saw him lying like a dead 
body; then he gradually recovered and went with me into my study carrying a large book of 
sheets of drawing paper; I said, "I drew that," and he answered by bowing his head. I 
opened the book, and on all the pages there were excellent drawings. And in my dream I 
knew that these drawings represented the love adventures of the soul with its beloved. 
And on its pages I saw a beautiful representation of a maiden in transparent garments and 
with a transparent body, flying up to the clouds. And I seemed to know that this maiden 
was nothing else than a representation of the Song of Songs. And looking at those 
drawings I dreamed I felt that I was doing wrong, but could not tear myself away from 
them. Lord, help me! My God, if Thy forsaking me is Thy doing, Thy will be done; but if I 
am myself the cause, teach me what I should do! I shall perish of my debauchery if Thou 
utterly desertest me!

51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK XI, 481a-482a
CHAPTER IX
Scarcely had Pierre laid his head on the pillow before he felt himself falling asleep, 
but suddenly, almost with the distinctness of reality, he heard the boom, boom, boom of 
firing, the thud of projectiles, groans and cries, and smelled blood and powder, and a 
feeling of horror and dread of death seized him. Filled with fright he opened his eyes 
and lifted his head from under his cloak. All was tranquil in the yard. Only someone's 
orderly passed through the gateway, splashing through the mud, and talked to the 
innkeeper. Above Pierre's head some pigeons, disturbed by the movement he had made in 
sitting up, fluttered under the dark roof of the penthouse. The whole courtyard was 
permeated by a strong peaceful smell of stable yards, delightful to Pierre at that 
moment. He could see the clear starry sky between the dark roofs of two penthouses.
"Thank God, there is no more of that!" he thought, covering up his head again. "Oh, what 
a terrible thing is fear, and how shamefully I yielded to it! But they . . . they were 
steady and calm all the time, to the end . . ." thought he.
They, in Pierre's mind, were the soldiers, those who had been at the battery, those who 
had given him food, and those who had prayed before the icon. They, those strange men he 
had not previously known, stood out clearly and sharply from everyone else.
"To be a soldier, just a soldier!" thought Pierre as he fell asleep, "to enter communal 
life completely, to be imbued by what makes them what they are. But how cast off all the 
superfluous, devilish burden of my outer man? There was a time when I could have done it. 
I could have run away from my father, as I wanted to. Or I might have been sent to serve 
as a soldier after the duel with Dolokhov. ' And the memory of the dinner at the English 
Club when he had challenged Dolokhov flashed through Pierre's mind, and then he 
remembered his benefactor at Torzhok. And now a picture of a solemn meeting of the lodge 
presented itself to his mind. It was taking place at the English Club and someone near 
and dear to him sat at the end of the table. "Yes, that is he! It is my benefactor. But 
he died!" thought Pierre. "Yes, he died, and I did not know he was alive. How sorry I am 
that he died, and how glad I am that he is alive again!" On one side of the table sat 
Anatole, Dolokhov, Nesvitski, Denisov, and others like them (in his dream the category to 
which these men belonged was as clearly defined in his mind as the category of those he 
termed they), and he heard those people, Anatole and Dolokhov, shouting and singing 
loudly; yet through their shouting the voice of his benefactor was heard speaking all the 
time and the sound of his words was as weighty and uninterrupted as the booming on the 
battlefield, but pleasant and comforting. Pierre did not understand what his benefactor 
was saying, but he knew (the categories of thoughts were also quite distinct in his 
dream) that he was talking of goodness and the possibility of being what they were. And 
they with their simple, kind, firm faces surrounded his benefactor on all sides. But 
though they were kindly they did not look at Pierre and did not know him. Wishing to 
speak and to attract their attention, he got up, but at that moment his legs grew cold 
and bare.
He felt ashamed, and with one arm covered his legs from which his cloak had in fact 
slipped. For a moment as he was rearranging his cloak Pierre opened his eyes and saw the 
same penthouse roofs, posts, and yard, but now they were all bluish, lit up, and 
glittering with frost or dew.
"It is dawn," thought Pierre. "But that's not what I want. I want to hear and understand 
my benefactor's words." Again he covered himself up with his cloak, but now neither the 
lodge nor his benefactor was there. There were only thoughts clearly expressed in words, 
thoughts that someone was uttering or that he himself was formulating.
Afterwards when he recalled those thoughts Pierre was convinced that someone outside 
himself had spoken them, though the impressions of that day had evoked them. He had 
never, it seemed to him, been able to think and express his thoughts like that when awake.
"To endure war is the most difficult subordination of man's freedom to the law of God," 
the voice had said. "Simplicity is submission to the will of God; you cannot escape from 
Him. And they are simple. They do not talk, but act. The spoken word is silver but the 
unspoken is golden. Man can be master of nothing while he fears death, but he who does 
not fear it possesses all. If there were no suffering, man would not know his 
limitations, would not know himself. The hardest thing [Pierre went on thinking, or 
hearing, in his dream] is to be able in your soul to unite the meaning of all. To unite 
all?" he asked himself. "No, not to unite. Thoughts cannot be united, but to harness all 
these thoughts together is what we need! Yes, one must harness them, must harness them!" 
he repeated to himself with inward rapture, feeling that these words and they alone 
expressed what he wanted to say and solved the question that tormented him.
"Yes, one must harness, it is time to harness." 
"Time to harness, time to harness, your excellency! Your excellency!" some voice was 
repeating. "We must harness, it is time to harness. . . ."
It was the voice of the groom, trying to wake him. The sun shone straight into Pierre's 
face. He glanced at the dirty innyard in the middle of which soldiers were watering their 
lean horses at the pump while carts were passing out of the gate. Pierre turned away with 
repugnance, and closing his eyes quickly fell back on the carriage seat. "No, I don't 
want that, I don't want to see and understand that. I want to understand what was 
revealing itself to me in my dream. One second more and I should have understood it all! 
But what am 1 to do? Harness, but how can I harness everything?" and Pierre felt with 
horror that the meaning of all he had seen and thought in the dream had been destroyed.
The groom, the coachman, and the innkeeper told Pierre that an officer had come with news 
that the French were already near Mozhaysk and that our men were leaving it. Pierre got 
up and, having told them to harness and overtake him, went on foot through the town.
The troops were moving on, leaving about ten thousand wounded behind them. There were 
wounded in the yards, at the windows of the houses, and the streets were crowded with 
them. In the streets, around carts that were to take some of the wounded away, shouts, 
curses, and blows could be heard. Pierre offered the use of his carriage, which had 
overtaken him, to a wounded general he knew, and drove with him to Moscow. On the way 
Pierre was told of the death of his brother-in-law Anatole and of that of Prince Andrew.

51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK XII, 561b-562a
He pressed her hand and released it, and she went back to the candle and sat down again 
in her former position. Twice she turned and looked at him, and her eyes met his beaming 
at her. She set herself a task on her stocking and resolved not to turn round till it was 
finished.
Soon he really shut his eyes and fell asleep. He did not sleep long and suddenly awoke 
with a start and in a cold perspiration. 
As he fell asleep he had still been thinking of the subject that now always occupied his 
mind—about life and death, and chiefly about death. He felt himself nearer to it.
"Love? What is love?" he thought.
"Love hinders death. Love is life. All, everything that I understand, I understand only 
because I love. Everything is, everything exists, only because I love. Everything is 
united by it alone. Love is God, and to die means that I, a particle of love, shall 
return to the general and eternal source." These thoughts seemed to him comforting. But 
they were only thoughts. Something was lacking in them, they were not clear, they were 
too one-sidedly personal and brain-spun. And there was the former agitation and 
obscurity. He fell asleep.
He dreamed that he was lying in the room he really was in, but that he was quite well and 
unwounded. Many various, indifferent, and insignificant people appeared before him. He 
talked to them and discussed something trivial. They were preparing to go away somewhere. 
Prince Andrew dimly realized that all this was trivial and that he had more important 
cares, but he continued to speak, surprising them by empty witticisms. Gradually, 
unnoticed, all these persons began to disappear and a single question, that of the closed 
door, superseded all else. He rose and went to the door to bolt and lock it. Everything 
depended on whether he was, or was not, in time to lock it. He went, and tried to hurry, 
but his legs refused to move and he knew he would not be in time to lock the door though 
he painfully strained all his powers. He was seized by an agonizing fear. And that fear 
was the fear of death. It stood behind the door. But just when he was clumsily creeping 
toward the door, that dreadful something on the other side was already pressing against 
it and forcing its way in. Something not human— death—was breaking in through that 
door, and had to be kept out. He seized the door, making a final effort to hold it 
back—to lock it was no longer possible—but his efforts were weak and clumsy and the 
door, pushed from behind by that terror, opened and closed again.
Once again it pushed from outside. His last superhuman efforts were vain and both halves 
of the door noiselessly opened. It entered, and it was death, and Prince Andrew died.
But at the instant he died, Prince Andrew remembered that he was asleep, and at the very 
instant he died, having made an effort, he awoke.
"Yes, it was death! I died—and woke up. Yes, death is an awakening!" And all at once it 
grew light in his soul and the veil that had till then concealed the unknown was lifted 
from his spiritual vision. He felt as if powers till then confined within him had been 
liberated, and that strange lightness did not again leave him.
When, waking in a cold perspiration, he moved on the divan, Natasha went up and asked him 
what was the matter. He did not answer and looked at her strangely, not understanding.
That was what had happened to him two days before Princess Mary's arrival. From that day, 
as the doctor expressed it, the wasting fever assumed a malignant character, but what the 
doctor said did not interest Natasha, she saw the terrible moral symptoms which to her 
were more convincing.
From that day an awakening from life came to Prince Andrew together with his awakening 
from sleep. And compared to the duration of life it did not seem to him slower than an 
awakening from sleep compared to the duration of a dream.
There was nothing terrible or violent in this comparatively slow awakening.
His last days and hours passed in an ordinary and simple way. Both Princess Mary and 
Natasha, who did not leave him, felt this. They did not weep or shudder and during these 
last days they themselves felt that they were not attending on him (he was no longer 
there, he had left them) but on what reminded them most closely of him—his body. Both 
felt this so strongly that the outward and terrible side of death did not affect them and 
they did not feel it necessary to foment their grief. Neither in his presence nor out of 
it did they weep, nor did they ever talk to one another about him. They felt that they 
could not express in words what they understood.
They both saw that he was sinking slowly and quietly, deeper and deeper, away from them, 
and they both knew that this had to be so and that it was right.



51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK XIV, 608a-b
CHAPTER XV
The stores, the prisoners, and the marshal's baggage train stopped at the village of 
Shamshevo. The men crowded together round the campfires. Pierre went up to the fire, ate 
some roast horseflesh, lay down with his back to the fire, and immediately fell asleep. 
He again slept as he had done at Mozhaysk after the battle of Borodino.
Again real events mingled with dreams and again someone, he or another, gave expression 
to his thoughts, and even to the same thoughts that had been expressed in his dream at 
Mozhaysk.
"Life is everything. Life is God. Everything changes and moves and that movement is God. 
And while there is life there is joy in consciousness of the divine. To love life is to 
love God. Harder and more blessed than all else is to love this life in one's sufferings, 
in innocent sufferings."
"Karataev!" came to Pierre's mind.
And suddenly he saw vividly before him a long-forgotten, kindly old man who had given him 
geography lessons in Switzerland. "Wait a bit," said the old man, and showed Pierre a 
globe. This globe was alive—a vibrating ball without fixed dimensions. Its whole 
surface consisted of drops closely pressed together, and all these drops moved and 
changed places, sometimes several of them merging into one, sometimes one dividing into 
many. Each drop tried to spread out and occupy as much space as possible, but others 
striving to do the same compressed it, sometimes destroyed it, and sometimes merged with 
it.
"That is life," said the old teacher.
"How simple and clear it is," thought Pierre.
"How is it I did not know it before?"
"God is in the midst, and each drop tries to expand so as to reflect Him to the greatest 
extent. And it grows, merges, disappears from the surface, sinks to the depths, and again 
emerges. There now, Karataev has spread out and disappeared. Do you understand, my 
child?" said the teacher.
"Do you understand, damn you?" shouted a voice, and Pierre woke up.
He lifted himself and sat up. A Frenchman who had just pushed a Russian soldier away was 
squatting by the fire, engaged in roasting a piece of meat stuck on a ramrod. His sleeves 
were rolled up and his sinewy, hairy, red hands with their short fingers deftly turned 
the ramrod. His brown morose face with frowning brows was clearly visible by the glow of 
the charcoal.

51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE I, 673d- 674a,c
Meanwhile downstairs in young Nicholas Bolkonski's bedroom a little lamp was burning as 
usual. (The boy was afraid of the dark and they could not cure him of it.) Dessalles 
slept propped up on four pillows and his Roman nose emitted sounds of rhythmic snoring. 
Little Nicholas, who had just waked up in a cold perspiration, sat up in bed and gazed 
before him with wide-open eyes. He had awaked from a terrible dream. He had dreamed that 
he and Uncle Pierre, wearing helmets such as were depicted in his Plutarch, were leading 
a huge army. The army was made up of white slanting lines that filled the air like the 
cobwebs that float about in autumn and which Dessalles called les fils de la Vierge. In 
front was Glory, which was similar to those threads but rather thicker. He and Pierre 
were borne along lightly and joyously, nearer and nearer to their goal. Suddenly the 
threads that moved them began to slacken and become entangled and it grew difficult to 
move. And Uncle Nicholas stood before them in a stern and threatening attitude. 
"Have you done this?" he said, pointing to some broken sealing wax and pens. "I loved 
you, but I have orders from Arakcheev and will kill the first of you who moves forward." 
Little Nicholas turned to look at Pierre but Pierre was no longer there. In his place was 
his father—Prince Andrew—and his father had neither shape nor form, but he existed, 
and when little Nicholas perceived him he grew faint with love: he felt himself 
powerless, limp, and formless. His father caressed and pitied him. But Uncle Nicholas 
came nearer and nearer to them. Terror seized young Nicholas and he awoke.
"My father!" he thought. (Though there were two good portraits of Prince Andrew in the 
house, Nicholas never imagined him in human form.) "My father has been with me and 
caressed me. He approved of me and of Uncle Pierre. Whatever he may tell me, I will do 
it. Mucius Scaevola burned his hand. Why should not the same sort of thing happen to me? 
I know they want me to learn. And I will learn. But someday I shall have finished 
learning, and then I will do something. I only pray God that something may happen to me 
such as happened to Plutarch's men, and I will act as they did. I will do better. 
Everyone shall know me, love me, and be delighted with me!" And suddenly his bosom heaved 
with sobs and he began to cry.
"Are you ill?" he heard Dessalles' voice asking. 
"No," answered Nicholas, and lay back on his pillow.
"He is good and kind and I am fond of him!" he thought of Dessalles. "But Uncle Pierre! 
Oh, what a wonderful man he is! And my father? Oh, Father, Father! Yes, I will do 
something with which even he would be satisfied. . . ."



























54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 11a-13a esp 11d-12c / Interpretation 
of Dreams, 173a-174d; 178a-205c esp 178a- 179c, 189b-190a, 194b-d, 197b-198d, 204c-d; 
230b-231c; 252c-340a esp 252c-253a, 264c- 272c, 282a-285b,332a-333b,339b-340a;356d- 373a 
passim / General Introduction, 476a-478b; 489c-494d esp 492d-493c; 504d-526c esp 
504d-506c, 518d-519d; 539c-544d esp 539c- 540a, 541b / New Introductory Lectures, 808d- 
817a esp 809b, 810b-d, 812d, 813d-814b
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 11a-13a 
Ladies and gentlemen, if you will permit me to generalize, as is indispensable in so 
brief a presentation, we may express our results up to this point in the formula: Our 
hysterical patients suffer from reminiscences. Their symptoms are the remnants and the 
memory symbols of certain (traumatic) experiences.
A comparison with other memory symbols from other sources will perhaps enable us better 
to understand this symbolism. The memorials and monuments with which we adorn our great 
cities are also such memory symbols. If you walk through London you will find before one 
of the greatest railway stations of the city a richly decorated Gothic pillar—Charing 
Cross. One of the old Plantagenet kings, in the thirteenth century, caused the body of 
his beloved queen Elea nor to be borne to Westminster, and had Gothic crosses erected at 
each of the stations where the coffin was set down. Charing Cross is the last of these 
monuments, which preserve the memory of this sad journey.² In another part of the city, 
you will see a high pillar of more modern construction, which is merely called "the 
Monument." This is in memory of the great fire which broke out in the neighborhood in the 
year 1666, and destroyed a great part of the city. These monuments are memory symbols 
like the hysterical symptoms; so far the comparison seems justified. But what would you 
say to a Londoner who today stood sadly before the monument to the funeral of Queen 
Eleanor, instead of going about his business with the haste engendered by modern 
industrial conditions, or rejoicing with the young queen of his own heart? Or to another, 
who before "the Monument" bemoaned the burning of his loved native city, which long since 
has arisen again so much more splendid than before?
Now hystericals and all neurotics behave like these two unpractical Londoners, not only 
in that they remember the painful experiences of the distant past, but because they are 
still strongly affected by them. They cannot escape from the past and neglect present 
reality in its favour. This fixation of the mental life on the
²Or rather the later copy of such a monument. The name "Charing" is itself, as Dr. E. 
Jones tells me, derived from the words chere reine.
pathogenic traumata is an essential, and practically a most significant characteristic of 
the neurosis. I will willingly concede the objection which you are probably formulating, 
as you think over the history of Breuer's patient. All her traumata originated at the 
time when she was caring for her sick father, and her symptoms could only be regarded as 
memory symbols of his sickness and death. They correspond to mourning, and a fixation on 
thoughts of the dead so short a time after death is certainly not pathological, but 
rather corresponds to normal emotional behavior. I concede this: there is nothing 
abnormal in the fixation of feeling on the trauma shown by Breuer's patient. But in other 
cases, like that of the tic that I have mentioned, the occasions for which lay ten and 
fifteen years back, the characteristic of this ab normal clinging to the past is very 
clear, and Breuer's patient would probably have developed it, if she had not come under 
the "cathartic treatment" such a short time after the traumatic experiences and the 
beginning of the disease. 
We have so far only explained the relation of the hysterical symptoms to the life history 
of the patient; now by considering two further factors which Breuer observed, we may get 
a hint as to the processes of the beginning of the illness and those of the cure. With 
regard to the first, it is especially to be noted that Breuer's patient in almost all 
pathogenic situations had to suppress a strong excitement, instead of giving vent to it 
by appropriate words and deeds. In the little experience with her governess' dog, she 
suppressed, through regard for the conventions, all manifestations of her very intense 
disgust. While she was seated by her father's sick bed, she was careful to betray nothing 
of her anxiety and her painful depression to the patient. When, later, she reproduced the 
same scene before the physician, the emotion which she had suppressed on the occurrence 
of the scene burst out with especial strength, as though it had been pent up all along. 
The symptom which had been caused by that scene reached its greatest intensity while the 
doctor was striving to revive the memory of the scene, and vanished after it had been 
fully laid bare. On the other hand, experience shows that if the patient is reproducing 
the traumatic scene to the physician, the process has no curative effect if, by some 
peculiar, chance,. there is no development of emotion. It is apparently these emotional 
processes upon which the illness of the patient and the restoration to health are 
dependent. We feel justified in regarding emotion as a quantity which may become 
increased, derived and dis placed. So we are forced to the conclusion that the patient 
fell ill because the emotion developed in the pathogenic situation was prevented from 
escaping normally, and that the essence of the sickness lies in the fact that these 
imprisoned (eingeklemmt) emotions undergo a series of abnormal changes. In part they are 
preserved as a lasting charge and as a source of constant disturbance in psychical life; 
in part they under go a change into unusual bodily innervations and inhibitions, which 
present themselves as the physical symptoms of the case. We have coined the name 
hysterical conversion for the latter process. Part of our mental energy is, under normal 
conditions, conducted off by way of physical innervation and gives what we call the 
expression of emotions. Hysterical conversion exaggerates this part of the course of a 
mental process which is emotionally coloured; it corresponds to a far more intense 
emotional expression, which finds outlet by new paths. If a stream flows in two channels, 
an overflow of one will take place as soon as the current in the other meets with an 
obstacle.
You see that we are in a fair way to arrive at a purely psychological theory of hysteria, 
in which we assign the first rank to the affective processes. A second observation of 
Breuer com pels us to ascribe to the altered condition of consciousness a great part in 
determining the characteristics of the disease. His patient showed many sorts of mental 
states, conditions of "absence," confusion and alteration of char acter, besides her 
normal state. In her normal state she was entirely ignorant of the pathogenic scenes and 
of their connection with her symptoms. She had forgotten those scenes, or at any rate had 
dissociated them from their pathogenic connection. When the patient was hypnotized, it 
was possible, after considerable difficulty, to re call those scenes to her memory, and 
by this means of recall, the symptoms were removed. It would have been extremely 
perplexing to know how to interpret this fact, if hypnotic practice and experiments had 
not pointed out the way. Through the study of hypnotic phenomena, the conception, strange 
though it was at first, has become familiar, that in one and the same individual several 
mental groupings are possible, which may remain relatively independent of each other, 
know nothing of each other, and which may cause a splitting of consciousness along lines 
which they lay down. Cases of such a sort, known as double personality (double 
conscience), occasionally appear spontaneously.
If, in such a division of personality, consciousness remains constantly bound up with one 
of the two states, this is called the conscious mental state, and the other the 
unconscious. In the well-known phenomena of so-called post hypnotic suggestion, in which 
a command given in hypnosis is later executed in the normal state as though by an 
imperative suggestion, we have an excellent basis for understanding how the unconscious 
state can influence the conscious, although the latter is ignorant of the existence of 
the former. In the same way it is quite possible to explain the facts in hysterical 
cases. Breuer came to the conclusion that the hysterical symptoms originated in such 
peculiar mental states, which he called hypnoidal states (hypnoide Zust'dnde). 
Experiences of an emotional nature, which occur during such hypnoidal states, easily 
become pathogenic, since such states do not present the conditions for a normal draining 
off of the emotion of the exciting processes. And as a result there arises a peculiar 
product of this exciting process, that is, the symptom, and this is projected like a 
foreign body into the normal state. The latter has, then, no conception of the 
significance of the hypnoidal pathogenic situation. Where a symptom arises, we also find 
an amnesia, a memory gap, and the filling of this gap includes the removal of the 
conditions under which the symptom originated.
I am afraid that this portion of my treatment will not seem very clear, but you must 
remember that we are dealing here with new and difficult views, which perhaps could not 
be made much clearer. This all goes to show that our knowledge in this field is not yet 
very far advanced. Breuer's idea of the hypnoidal states has, moreover, been shown to be 
superfluous and a hindrance to further investigation, and has been dropped from present 
conceptions of psycho-analysis. Later I shall at least suggest what other influences and 
processes have been disclosed besides that of the hypnoidal states, to which Breuer 
limited the causal moment.
You have probably also felt, and rightly, that Breuer's investigations gave you only a 
very incomplete theory and insufficient explanation of the phenomena which we have 
observed. But complete theories do not fall from Heaven, and you would have had still 
greater reason to be distrustful, had anyone offered you at the beginning of his 
observations a well-rounded theory, without any gaps; such a theory could only be the 
child of his speculations and not the fruit of an unprejudiced investigation of the facts.
SECOND LECTURE
Ladies and Gentlemen: At about the same time that Breuer was using the "talking-cure" 
with his patient, M. Charcot began in Paris, with the hystericals of the Salpetriere, 
those re searches which were to lead to a new under standing of the disease. These 
results were, however, not yet known in Vienna. But when about ten years later Breuer and 
I published our preliminary communication on the psychic mechanism of hysterical 
phenomena, which grew out of the cathartic treatment of Breuer's first patient, we were 
both of us under the spell of Charcot's investigations. We made the pathogenic 
experiences of our patients, which acted as psychic traumata, equivalent to those 
physical traumata whose influence on hysterical paralyses Charcot had determined; and 
Breuer's hypothesis of hypnoidal states is itself only an echo of the fact that Charcot 
had artificially re produced those traumatic paralyses in hypnosis. 
The great French observer, whose student I was during the years 1885-86, had no natural 
bent for, creating psychological. theories.. His student, P. Janet, was the first to 
attempt to penetrate more deeply into the psychic processes of hysteria, and we followed 
his example, when we made the mental splitting and the dis sociation of personality the 
central points of our theory. Janet propounds a theory of hysteria which draws upon the 
principal theories of heredity and degeneration which are current in France. According to 
his view, hysteria is a form of degenerative alteration of the nervous system, 
manifesting itself in a congenital weakness of the function of psychic synthesis. The 
hysterical patient is from the start incapable of correlating and unifying the manifold 
of his mental processes, and so there arises the tendency to mental dissociation. If you 
will permit me to use a banal but clear illustration, Janet's hysterical reminds one of a 
weak woman who has been shopping, and is now on her way home, laderr with: packages and 
bundles of every de scription. She cannot manage the whole lot with her two arms and her 
ten fingers, and soon she drops one. When she stoops to pick this up, an other breaks 
loose, and so it goes on.

54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, esp 11d-12c
We have so far only explained the relation of the hysterical symptoms to the life history 
of the patient; now by considering two further factors which Breuer observed, we may get 
a hint as to the processes of the beginning of the illness and those of the cure. With 
regard to the first, it is especially to be noted that Breuer's patient in almost all 
pathogenic situations had to suppress a strong excitement, instead of giving vent to it 
by appropriate words and deeds. In the little experience with her governess' dog, she 
suppressed, through regard for the conventions, all manifestations of her very intense 
disgust. While she was seated by her father's sick bed, she was careful to betray nothing 
of her anxiety and her painful depression to the patient. When, later, she reproduced the 
same scene before the physician, the emotion which she had suppressed on the occurrence 
of the scene burst out with especial strength, as though it had been pent up all along. 
The symptom which had been caused by that scene reached its greatest intensity while the 
doctor was striving to revive the memory of the scene, and vanished after it had been 
fully laid bare. On the other hand, experience shows that if the patient is reproducing 
the traumatic scene to the physician, the process has no curative effect if, by some 
peculiar, chance,. there is no development of emotion. It is apparently these emotional 
processes upon which the illness of the patient and the restoration to health are 
dependent. We feel justified in regarding emotion as a quantity which may become 
increased, derived and dis placed. So we are forced to the conclusion that the patient 
fell ill because the emotion developed in the pathogenic situation was prevented from 
escaping normally, and that the essence of the sickness lies in the fact that these 
imprisoned (eingeklemmt) emotions undergo a series of abnormal changes. In part they are 
preserved as a lasting charge and as a source of constant disturbance in psychical life; 
in part they under go a change into unusual bodily innervations and inhibitions, which 
present themselves as the physical symptoms of the case. We have coined the name 
hysterical conversion for the latter process. Part of our mental energy is, under normal 
conditions, conducted off by way of physical innervation and gives what we call the 
expression of emotions. Hysterical conversion exaggerates this part of the course of a 
mental process which is emotionally coloured; it corresponds to a far more intense 
emotional expression, which finds outlet by new paths. If a stream flows in two channels, 
an overflow of one will take place as soon as the current in the other meets with an 
obstacle.
You see that we are in a fair way to arrive at a purely psychological theory of hysteria, 
in which we assign the first rank to the affective processes. A second observation of 
Breuer com pels us to ascribe to the altered condition of consciousness a great part in 
determining the characteristics of the disease. His patient showed many sorts of mental 
states, conditions of "absence," confusion and alteration of char acter, besides her 
normal state. In her normal state she was entirely ignorant of the pathogenic scenes and 
of their connection with her symptoms. She had forgotten those scenes, or at any rate had 
dissociated them from their pathogenic connection. When the patient was hypnotized, it 
was possible, after considerable difficulty, to re call those scenes to her memory, and 
by this means of recall, the symptoms were removed. It would have been extremely 
perplexing to know how to interpret this fact, if hypnotic practice and experiments had 
not pointed out the way. Through the study of hypnotic phenomena, the conception, strange 
though it was at first, has become familiar, that in one and the same individual several 
mental groupings are possible, which may remain relatively independent of each other, 
know nothing of each other, and which may cause a splitting of consciousness along lines 
which they lay down. Cases of such a sort, known as double personality (double 
conscience), occasionally appear spontaneously.
If, in such a division of personality, consciousness remains constantly bound up with one 
of the two states, this is called the conscious mental state, and the other the 
unconscious. In the well-known phenomena of so-called post hypnotic suggestion, in which 
a command given in hypnosis is later executed in the normal state as though by an 
imperative suggestion, we have an excellent basis for understanding how the unconscious 
state can influence the conscious, although the latter is ignorant of the existence of 
the former. In the same way it is quite possible to explain the facts in hysterical 
cases. Breuer came to the conclusion that the hysterical symptoms originated in such 
peculiar mental states, which he called hypnoidal states (hypnoide Zust'dnde). 
Experiences of an emotional nature, which occur during such hypnoidal states, easily 
become pathogenic, since such states do not present the conditions for a normal draining 
off of the emotion of the exciting processes. And as a result there arises a peculiar 
product of this exciting process, that is, the symptom, and this is projected like a 
foreign body into the normal state. The latter has, then, no conception of the 
significance of the hypnoidal pathogenic situation. Where a symptom arises, we also find 
an amnesia, a memory gap, and the filling of this gap includes the removal of the 
conditions under which the symptom originated.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, 173a-174d
We have already become acquainted with many conceptions of the dream, which in this sense 
are more or less deserving of the name of dream-theories. The belief of the ancients that 
dreams were sent by the gods in order to guide the actions of man was a complete theory 
of the dream, which told them all that was worth knowing about dreams. Since dreams have 
become an object of biological research we have a greater number of theories, some of 
which, however, are very incomplete.
Provided we make no claim to completeness, we might venture on the following rough 
grouping of dream-theories, based on their funda mental conception of the degree and mode 
of the psychic activity in dreams:—
1. Theories, like those of Delboeuf, which al low the full psychic activity of the waking 
state to continue in our dreams. Here the psyche does not sleep; its apparatus remains 
intact; but under the conditions of the sleeping state, which differ from those of the 
waking state, it must in its normal functioning give results which differ from those of 
the waking state. As regards these theories, it may be questioned whether their authors 
are in a position to derive the distinction between dreaming and waking thought entirely 
from the conditions of the sleeping state. Moreover, they lack one possible access to a 
function of dreams; one does riot understand to what purpose one dreams— why the 
complicated mechanism of the psychic apparatus should continue to operate even when it is 
placed under conditions to which it does not appear to be adapted. There are only two 
purposeful reactions in the place of the reaction of dreaming: to sleep dreamlessly, or 
to wake when affected by disturbing stimuli.
2. Theories which, on the contrary, assume for the dream a diminution of the psychic 
activity, a loosening of connections, and an impoverishment of the available material. In 
accordance with these theories, one must assume for sleep a psychological character 
entirely different from that given by Delboeuf. Sleep encroaches widely upon the psyche; 
it does not consist in the mere shutting it off from the outer world; on the contrary, it 
enters into its mechanism, and makes it for the time being unserviceable. If I may draw a 
comparison from psychiatry, I would say that the first group of theories construes the 
dream like a paranoia, while the second represents it as a type of mental deficiency or 
amentia.
The theory that only a fragment of the psychic activity paralysed by sleep finds 
expression in dreams is that by far the most favoured by medical writers, and by 
scientists in general. In so far as one may presuppose a general interest in 
dream-interpretation, one may indeed' de scribe it as the most popular theory of dreams. 
It is remarkable how nimbly this particular theory avoids the greatest danger that 
threatens every dream-interpretation; that is, shipwreck on one of the contrasts 
incorporated in dreams. Since this theory regards dreams as the result of a partial 
waking (or, as Herbart puts it in his Psychologie uber den Traum, "a gradual, partial, 
and at the same time very anomalous waking"), it is able to cover the whole series, from 
the inferior activities of dreams, which betray themselves by their absurdity, to fully 
concentrated intellectual activity, by a series of states of progressive awakening, 
ending in complete wakefulness.
Those who find the physiological mode of expression indispensable, or who deem it more 
scientific, will find this theory of dreams summarized in Binz's description (p. 43):—
This state (of torpor), however, gradually comes to an end in the hours of early morning. 
The accumulated products of fatigue in the albumen of the brain gradually diminish. They 
are slowly decomposed, or carried away by the constantly flowing blood-stream. Here and 
there individual groups of cells can be distinguished as being awake, while around them 
all is still in a state of torpidity. The isolated work of the individual groups now 
appears before our clouded consciousness, which is still powerless to control other parts 
of the brain, which gov ern the associations. Hence the pictures created, which for the 
most part correspond to the objective impressions of the immediate past, combine with one 
another in a wild and uncontrolled fashion, As the number of brain-cells set free 
constantly increases, the irrationality of the dream becomes constantly less." 
The conception of the dream as an incomplete, partial waking state, or traces of the in 
fluence of this conception, will of course be found in the works of all the modern 
physiologists and philosophers. It is most completely represented by Maury. It often 
seems as though this author conceives the state of being awake or asleep as susceptible 
of shifting from one anatomical region to another; each anatomical region seeming to him 
to be connected with a definite psychic function. Here I will merely suggest that even if 
the theory of partial waking were confirmed, its finer superstructure would still call 
for exhaustive consideration. 
No function of dreams, of course, can emerge from this conception of the dream-life. On 
the contrary; Binz, one of the chief proponents of this theory, consistently enough 
denies that dreams have any status or importance. He says (P- 357): "All the facts, as we 
see them, urge us to characterize the dream as a physical process, in all cases useless, 
and in many cases definitely morbid."
The expression physical in reference to dreams (the word is emphasized by the author) 
points, of course, in more than one direction. In the first place, it refers to the 
aetiology of dreams, which was of special interest to Binz, as he was studying the 
experimental production of dreams by the administration of drugs. It is certainly in 
keeping with this kind of dream theory to ascribe the incitement to dreaming,: whenever 
possible, exclusively to somatic origins. Presented in the most extreme form the theory 
is as follows: After we have put our selves to sleep by the banishment of stimuli, there 
would be no need to dream, and no reason for dreaming until the morning, when the gradual 
awakening through the fresh invasion of stimuli might be reflected in the phenome non of 
dreaming. But, as a matter of fact, it is not possible to protect our sleep from stimuli; 
like the germs of life of which Mephistopheles complained, stimuli come to the sleeper 
from all directions—from without, from within, and even from all those bodily regions 
which never trouble us during the waking state. Thus our sleep is disturbed; now this, 
now that little corner of the psyche is jogged into the waking state, and the psyche 
functions for a while with the. awakened fraction, yet is thankful to fall asleep again. 
The dream is the reaction to the disturbance of sleep caused by the stimulus, but it is, 
when all is said, a purely superfluous reaction.
The description of the dream—which, after all, remains an activity of the psychic 
organ— as a physical process has yet another connotation; So to describe it.is to deny 
that the dream has the dignity of a psychic process. The old simile of "the ten fingers 
of a person ignorant of music running over the keyboard of an instrument" perhaps best 
illustrates in what es teem the dream is commonly held by the representatives of exact 
science. Thus conceived, it becomes something wholly insusceptible of interpretation. How 
could the ten fingers of a player ignorant of music perform a musical composition? 
The theory of partial wakefulness did not escape criticism even by the earlier writers^ 
Thus Burdach wrote in 1830: "If we say that dreaming is a partial waking, then, in the 
first place, neither the waking nor the sleeping state is explained thereby; secondly, 
this amounts only to saying that certain powers of the mind are active in dreams while 
others are at rest. But such irregularities occur throughout life. . . ." (P. 482).
The prevailing dream-theory which conceives the dream as a "physical" process finds a 
certain support in a very interesting conception of the dream which was first propounded 
by Robert in 1866, and which is seductive because it assigns to the dream a function or a 
useful result. As the basis of his theory Robert takes two objectively observable facts 
which we have already discussed in our consideration of dream-material (p. 144 above). 
These facts are: (1) that one very often dreams about the most insignificant impressions 
of the day; and (2) that one rarely carries over into the dream the absorbing interests 
of the day. Robert asserts as an indisputable fact that those matters which have been 
fully settled and solved never evoke dreams, but only such as lie incompleted in the 
mind, or touch it merely in passing (p. 10). "For this reason we cannot usually explain 
our dreams, since their causes are to be found in sensory impressions of the preceding 
day which have not attained sufficient recognition on the part of the dreamer" The 
condition permitting an impression to reach the dream is, therefore, that this impression 
has been disturbed in its elaboration, or that it was too insignificant to lay claim.to 
such elaboration.
Robert therefore conceives the dream "as a physical process of elimination which in its 
psychic reaction reaches the consciousness." Dreams are eliminations of thoughts nipped 
in the bud. "A man deprived of the capacity for dreaming would in time become mentally 
unbalanced, because an immense number of unfinished and unsolved thoughts and superficial 
impressions would accumulate in his brain, under the pressure of which all that should be 
incorporated in the memory as a completed whole would be stifled." The dream acts as a 
safety-valve for the over-burdened brain. Dreams possess a healing and unburdening power 
(p. 32).

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, 178a-205c 
The dream-phantasy may, however, direct its attention not merely to the form of the 
exciting organ, but may even make the substance contained therein the object of 
symbolization. Thus, for example, the dream excited by the intestinal stimuli may lead us 
through muddy streets the dream due to stimuli from the bladder to foaming water. Or the 
stimulus as such, the nature of its excitation, and the object which it covets, are 
represented symbolically. Or, again, the dream-ego enters into a concrete association 
with the symbolization of its own state; as, for example, when in the case of painful 
stimuli we struggle desperately with vicious dogs or raging bulls, or when in a sexual 
dream the dreamer sees herself pursued by a naked man. Disregarding all the possible 
prolixity of elaboration, a phantastic symbolizing activity remains as the central force 
of every dream. Volkelt, in his fine and enthusiastic essay, attempted to penetrate still 
further into the character of this phantasy, and to assign to the psychic activity thus 
recognized its position in a system of philosophical ideas, which, however, remains... 
altogether^ too difficult of comprehension for anyone who is hot prepared by previous 
training for the intuitive comprehension of philosophical modes of-thought.
Schemer attributes no useful function to the activity of the symbolizing phantasy in 
dreams. In. dreams the psyche plays with the stimuli which are offered to it. One might 
conjecture that it plays in a mischievous fashion. And we might be asked whether our 
detailed consideration of Schemer's dream-theory, the arbitrariness, of which, and its 
deviation from the rules of all forms of research are only too obvious, can lead to any 
useful results. We might fitly reply that to reject Schemer's theory without previous 
examination would be imposing too arrogant a veto. This theory is based on the 
impressions produced by his dreams on a man who paid close attention to them, and who 
would appear to be personally very well equipped for tracing obscure psychic phenomena. 
Furthermore, it treats of a subject which (though rich in its contents and relations) has 
for thousands of years appeared mysterious to humanity, and to the elucidation of which 
science, strictly so called, has, as it confesses, contributed nothing beyond 
attempting—in uncompromising opposition to popular sentiment—to deny its content and 
significance. Finally, let us frankly admit that it seems as though we cannot very well 
avoid the phantastical in our attempts to explain dreams. We must remember also that 
there is such a thing as a phantasy of ganglion cells; the passage cited (p. 87) from a 
sober and exact investigator like Binz, which describes how the dawn of awakening floods 
the dormant cell-masses of the cerebral cortex, is not a whit less fanciful and 
improbable than Schemer's attempts at interpretation. I hope to be able to demonstrate 
that there is something real underlying these attempts, though the phenomena* which he de 
scribes have been only vaguely recognized, and do not possess the character of 
universality that should entitle them to be the basis of a theory of dreams. For the 
present, Schemer's theory of dreams, in contrast to the medical theory, may perhaps lead 
us to realize between what, extremes the explanation of dream-life is still unsteadily 
vacillating.
H. The Relation between Dreams and Mental Diseases
When we speak of the relation of dreams to mental derangement, we may mean three 
different things: (1) aetiological and clinical relations, as when a dream represents or 
initiates a psychotic condition, or occurs subsequently to such a condition;.(2) changes 
which the dreamlife undergoes in cases of mental disease; (3) inner relations between 
dreams and psychoses, analogies which point to an intimate relationship. These manifold 
relations between the two series of phenomena were in the early days of medical 
science—and are once more at the present time—a favourite theme of medical writers, 
as we may learn from the literature on the subject collated. by Spitta, Radestock, Maury, 
and Tissie. Recently Sante de Sanctis has directed his attention to this relationship.¹ 
For the purposes of our discussion it will suffice merely to glance at this important 
subject.
As to the clinical and aetiological relations between dreams and the psychoses, I will re 
port the following observations as examples: Hohnbaum asserts (see Krauss) that the first 
attack of insanity is frequently connected with a terrifying, anxiety-dream, and that the 
pre dominating idea is related to this dream. Sante de Sanctis adduces similar 
observations in respect of paranoiacs, and declares the dream to be, in some of them, "la 
vraie cause determinate de la folie."² The psychosis may come to life quite suddenly, 
simultaneously with the dream that contains its effective and delusive explanation, or it 
may develop slowly through subsequent dreams that have still to struggle against doubt. 
In one of de Sanctis's cases an intensively moving dream was accompanied by slight 
hysterical attacks, which, in their turn, were followed by an anxious melancholic state. 
Fere (cited by Tissie) refers to a dream which was followed by hysterical paralysis. Here 
the dream is presented as the aetiology of mental derangement, although we should be 
making a statement equally consistent with the facts were we to say that the first 
manifestation of the mental derangement occurred in the dreamlife, that-the disorder 
first broke through in the dream. In other instances, the morbid symptoms are included in 
the dream-life, or the psychosis remains confined to the dream-life Thus Thomayer calls 
our attention to anxiety-dreams which must be conceived as the equivalent of epileptic 
attacks. Allison has described cases of nocturnal insanity (see Radestock), in which the 
subjects are apparently perfectly well in the day-time, while hallucinations, fits of 
frenzy, and the like regularly make their appearance at night. De Sanctis and Tissie 
record similar observations (the equivalent of a paranoic dream in an alcoholic, voices 
accusing a wife of infidelity). Tissie records many observations of recent date in- which 
behaviour of a pathological character (based on delusory hypotheses, obsessive impulses) 
had their origin in dreams. Guislain describes a case in which sleep was replaced by an 
intermittent in sanity.
We cannot doubt that one day the physician will concern himself not only with the psychol-
¹Among the more recent authors who have occupied themselves with these relations are: 
Fere, Ideler, Lasegue, Pichon, Regis Vespa, Giessler, Kazodowsky, Pachantoni, and others.
²The real determining cause of the madness.—Ed.

ogy, but also with the psycho-pathology of dreams.
In cases of convalescence from insanity, it is often especially obvious that while the 
functions may be healthy by day the dream-life may still partake of the psychosis. 
Gregory is said to have been the first to call attention to such cases (see Krauss). 
Maeario (cited by Tissie) gives an account of a maniac who, a week after his complete 
recovery, once more experienced in dreams the flux of ideas and the unbridled, impulses 
of his disease.
Concerning the changes which the dream-life undergoes in chronic psychotics, little 
research has been undertaken as yet.. On the other hand, early attention was given to the 
inner relationship between dreams and mental disturbances, a relationship which is 
demonstrated by the complete agreement of the manifestations occurring in each. According 
to Maury, Cabanis, in his Rapports du Physique et du Moral, was the first to call 
attention to this relationship; he was followed by Lelut, J. Moreau, and more 
particularly the philosopher Maine de Biran. The comparison between the two is of course 
older still. Radestock begins the chapter in which he deals with the subject by citing a 
number of opinions which insist on the analogy between insanity and dreaming. Kant says 
somewhere: "The lunatic is a dreamer in the waking state." According to Krauss, "Insanity 
is a dream in which the senses are awake." Schopenhauer terms the dream a brief insanity, 
and insanity a long dream. Hagen describes delirium as a dream-life which is inducted not 
by sleep but by disease. Wundt, in his Physiologische Psychologie, declares: "As a matter 
of fact we ourselves may in dreams experience almost all the manifestations which we 
observe in the asylums for the insane."
The specific points of agreement in consequence of which such a comparison commends 
itself to our judgment are enumerated by Spitta, who groups them (very much as Maury has 
done) as follows: "(1) Suspension, or at least retardation of self-consciousness, and 
consequently ignorance of the condition as such, the impossibility of astonishment, and a 
lack of moral consciousness. (2) Modified perception of the sensory organs; that is, 
perception is as a rule diminished in dreams, and greatly enhanced in insanity. (3) 
Mutual combination of ideas exclusively in accordance with the laws of association and 
reproduction, hence automatic series-formations: hence again a lack of proportion in the 
relations between ideas (ex-aggerations, phantasms); and the results of all this: (4) 
Changes in—for example, inversions of—the personality, and sometimes of the 
idiosyncrasies of the character (perversities)." 
Radestock adds a few additional data concerning the analogous nature of the material of 
dreams and of mental derangement: "The greatest number of hallucinations and illusions 
are found in the sphere of the senses of sight and hearing and general sensation. As in 
dreams, the fewest elements are supplied by the senses of smell and taste. The 
fever-patient, like the dreamer, is assailed by reminiscences from the remote past; what 
the waking and healthy man seems to have forgotten is recollected in sleep and in 
disease." The analogy be tween dreams and the psychoses receives its full value only 
when, like a family resemblance, it is extended to the subtler points of mimicry, and 
even the individual peculiarities of facial expression.
"To him who is tortured by physical and mental; sufferings the dream accords what has 
been denied him by-reality, to wit, physical well-being, and happiness; so, too, the 
insane see radiant images of happiness, eminence, and wealth. The supposed possession of 
estates and the imaginary fulfilment of wishes, the denial or destruction of which have 
actually been a psychic cause of the insanity, often form the main content of the 
delirium. The woman who has lost a dearly beloved child experiences in her delirium the 
joys of maternity; the man who has suffered reverses of fortune deems himself immensely 
wealthy; and the jilted girl sees herself tenderly beloved."
(This passage from Radestock is an abstract of a brilliant exposition of Griesinger's (p. 
in), which reveals, with the greatest clarity, wish fulfilment as a characteristic of the 
imagination common to dreams and to the psychoses. My own investigations have taught me 
that here is to be found the key to a psychological theory of dreams and of the 
psychoses.)
"Absurd combinations of ideas and weakness of judgment are the main, characteristics of 
the dream and of insanity." The over-estimation of one's own mental capacity, which ap 
pears absurd to sober judgment, is found alike in both, and the rapid flux of imaginings 
in the dream corresponds to the flux of ideas in the psychoses. Both are devoid of any 
measure of time. The splitting of the personality in dreams, which, for instance, 
distributes one's own knowledge between two persons, one of whom, the strange person, 
corrects one's own ego in the dream, entirely corresponds with the well known splitting 
of the personality in hallucinatory paranoia; the dreamer, too, hears his own thoughts 
expressed by strange voices. Even the constant delusive ideas find their analogy in the 
stereotyped and recurring pathological dream (reve obsedani). After recovering from 
delirium, patients not infrequently declare that the whole period of their illness 
appeared to them like an uncomfortable dream; indeed, they inform us that sometimes 
during their illness they have suspected that they were only dreaming, just as often 
happens in the sleep-dream. In view of all this, it is not surprising that Radestock 
should summarize his own opinion, and that of many others, in the following words: 
"Insanity, an abnormal morbid phenomenon, is to be regarded as an enhancement of the 
periodically recurring normal dream-state" (p. 228).
Krauss attempted to base the relationship between the dream and insanity upon their 
aetiology (or rather upon the sources of ex citation), thus, perhaps, making the 
relationship even more intimate than was possible on the basis of the analogous nature of 
the phenomena manifested. According to him, the fundamental element common to both is, as 
we have already learned, the organically conditioned sensation, the sensation of physical 
stimuli, the general sensation arising out: of contributions from all the organs (cf. 
Peisse, cited by Maury, p. 52).
The undeniable agreement between dreams and mental derangement; extending even to 
characteristic details, constitutes one of the strongest confirmations of the medical 
theory of dream-life, according to which the dream is represented as a useless and 
disturbing process, and as the expression of a diminished psychic activity. One cannot 
expect, for the present, to derive the final explanation of the dream from the psychic 
derangements, since, as; is well known, our understanding of the origin of the latter is 
still highly unsatisfactory. It is very probable, however^ that a modified conception of 
the dream must also influence our views regarding the inner mechanism of mental 
disorders, and hence we may say that we are working towards the explanation of the 
psychoses -when we endeavour to elucidate the mystery of dreams.
Addendum 1909
I shall have to justify myself for not ex tending my summary of the literature of 
dream-problems to cover the period between the first appearance of this book and the 
publication of the second edition. This justification may not seem very satisfactory to 
the reader; none the less; to me it was decisive. The motives which induced me.to 
summarize the treatment of; dreams in the literature of the subject have been exhausted 
by the foregoing introduction; to have continued this would have cost me a great deal of 
effort and would not have been particularly useful or instructive. For the interval in 
question—a period of nine years—has yielded nothing new or valuable as regards the 
conception of dreams either in actual material or in novel points of view. In most of the 
literature which has appeared since the publication of my own work the latter has not 
been mentioned or discussed; it has, of course, received the least attention from the 
so-called "research-workers on dreams," who have thus afforded a brilliant example of the 
aversion to learning anything new so characteristic of the scientist. "Les savants ne 
sont pas curieux,"¹ said the scoffer Anatole France. If there were such a thing in; 
science as the right of revenge, I in my turn should be justified in ignoring the 
literature which has appeared since the publication of this book. The few reviews which 
have appeared in the scientific journals are so full of misconceptions and lack of 
comprehension that my only possible answer to my critics would be a request that they 
should read this book over again—or perhaps merely that they should read it!
In the works of those physicians who make use of the psycho-analytic method of treatment 
a great many dreams have been recorded and interpreted in accordance with my directions. 
In so far as these works go beyond the confirmation of my own assertions, I have noted 
their results in the context of my exposition. A supplementary bibliography at the end of 
this volume comprises the most important of these new publications. The comprehensive 
work on the dream by Sante de Sanctis, of which a German translation appeared soon after 
its publication, was produced simultaneously with my own, so that I could not review his 
results, nor could he comment upon mine. I am sorry to have to express the opinion that 
this laborious work is exceedingly poor in ideas, so poor that one could never divine 
from it the possibility of the problems which I have treated in these pages. 
I can thing of only two publications which
¹The learned are not inquisitive. -ED.
touch on my own treatment of the dream problems. A young philosopher, H. Swoboda, who has 
ventured to extend W. Fliess's discovery of  biological periodicity (in series of 
twenty-three and twenty-eight, days) to the psychic field, has produced art imaginative 
essay,² in which, among other things, he has use do this key: to solve the riddle of 
dreams; Such a solution, however, would be an inadequate estimate of the significance of 
dreams. The material content of dreams would be explained by the coincidence of all those 
memories which, on the night of the dream, complete one of these biological periods for 
the first or the nth time. A personal communication of the author's led me to assume that 
he himself no longer took this theory very seriously. But it seems that I was mistaken in 
this conclusion: I shall record in another place some observations made with reference to 
Swoboda's thesis, which did not, however, yield convincing results. It gave me far 
greater pleasure to find by chance, in an unexpected quarter, a conception of the dream 
which is in complete agreement with the essence of my own. The relevant dates preclude 
the possibility that this conception was influenced by reading my book: I must therefore 
hail this as the only demonstrable concurrence with the essentials of my theory of dreams 
to be found in the literature of the subject. The book which contains the passage that I 
have in mind was published (in its second edition) in 191o, by Lynkeus, under the title 
Phantasien eines Realisten.³
Addendum 1914
The above apologia was written in 1909. Since then, the state of affairs has certainly 
under gone a change; my contribution to the "interpretation of dreams" is no longer 
ignored in the literature of the subject. But the new situation makes it even more 
impossible to continue the foregoing summary. The Interpretation of Dreams has evoked a 
whole series of new contentions and problems, which have been expounded by the authors in 
the most varied fashions. But I cannot discuss these works until I have developed the 
theories to which their authors have referred. Whatever has appeared to me as valuable in 
this recent literature I
²H. Swoboda, Die Perioden des Menschlichen Organismus, 1904.
³Cf. Josef Popper-Lynkeus Traumes (1923) in vol. Xi Schriften. und die Theorie des of my 
Gesammelten

have accordingly reviewed in the course of the following exposition.
II. The Method of Dream Interpretation
The Analysis of a Specimen Dream
The epigraph on the title-page of this volume indicates the tradition to which I prefer 
to ally myself in my conception of the dream. I am proposing to show that dreams are 
capable of interpretation; and any contributions to the solution of the problems which 
have already been discussed will emerge only as possible by products in the 
accomplishment of my special task. On the hypothesis that dreams are susceptible of 
interpretation, I at once find myself in disagreement with the prevailing doctrine of 
dreams—in fact, with all the theories of dreams, excepting only that of Schemer, for to 
interpret a dream is to specify its meaning, to replace it by something which takes its 
position in the concatenation of our psychic activities as a link of definite importance 
and value. But, as we have seen, the scientific theories of the dream leave no room for a 
problem of dream-interpretation; since, in the first, places according to these theories, 
dreaming is not a psychic activity at all, but a somatic process which makes itself known 
to the psychic apparatus by means of symbols. Lay opinion has always been opposed to 
these theories; It asserts its privilege of proceeding illogically, and although it 
admits that dreams are^ incomprehensible and absurd, it cannot summon up the courage to 
deny that dreams have any significance. Led by a dim intuition, it seems rather to assume 
that dreams have a meaning, albeit a hidden one; that they are intended as a substitute 
for some other thought-process, and that we have only to disclose this substitute 
correctly in order to discover the hidden meaning of the dream.
The unscientific world, therefore, has always endeavoured to interpret dreams, and by ap 
plying one or the other of two essentially different methods. The first of these methods 
envisages the dream-content as a whole, and seeks to replace it by another content, which 
is intelligible and in certain respects analogous. This is symbolic dream-interpretation; 
and of course it goes to pieces at the very outset in the case of those dreams which are 
not only unintelligible but confused. The construction which the biblical Joseph placed 
upon the dream of Pharaoh furnishes an example of this method. The seven fat kine, after 
which came seven lean ones that devoured the former, were a symbolic substitute for seven 
years of famine in the land of Egypt, which according to the - prediction were to consume 
all the surplus that seven fruitful years had produced. Most of the artificial dreams 
contrived by the poets1 are intended for some such symbolic interpretation, for they 
reproduce the thought conceived by the poet in a guise not unlike the disguise which we 
are wont to find in our dreams. 
The idea that the dream concerns itself chiefly with the future, whose form it surmises 
in advance—a relic of the prophetic significance with which dreams were once 
invested—now becomes the motive for translating into the future the meaning of the 
dream which has been found by means of symbolic interpretation.
A demonstration of the manner in which one arrives at such a symbolic interpretation can 
not, of course, be given. Success remains a matter of ingenious conjecture; of direct 
intuition, and for this reason dream-interpretation has naturally been elevated into an 
art which seems to depend upon extraordinary gifts.² The second of the two popular 
methods of dream-interpretation entirely abandons such claims. It might be described as 
the cipher method, since it treats the dream as a kind of secret code in which every sign 
is translated into another sign of known meaning, according to an established key. For 
example, I have dreamt of a letter, and also of a funeral or the like; I consult a 
"dream-book," and I find that "letter" is to be translated by "vexation" and "funeral" by 
"engagement." It now remains to establish a connection, which I am again to assume as 
pertaining to the future, by means of the rigmarole which I have deciphered. An 
interesting variant of this cipher procedure, a variant in which its character of purely 
me-
¹In a novel Gradiva, by the poet W. Jensen,, I chanced to discover several fictitious 
dreams, which were perfectly correct in their construction, and could be interpreted as 
though they had not been invented, but had been dreamt by actual persons. The poet 
declared, upon my inquiry, that he was unacquainted with my theory of dreams. I have 
made: use of this agreement between my investigations and the creations of the poet as a 
proof of the correctness of my method of dream-analysis {Der Wahn und die Traume in W. 
Jensen's Gradiva, vol. i of the Schriften zur angewandien Seelenkimde, 1906, edited by 
myself, Ges. Schrif ten, vol. ix).
2 Aristotle expressed himself in this connection by saying that the best interpreter of 
.dreams is he who can best grasp similarities. For dream-pictures, like pictures in 
water, are disfigured by the- motion (of the water)., so that he hits the target best 
"who is able to recognize the true picture in the distorted one (Biichsenschutz, p. 65).


chanical transference is to a certain extent corrected, is presented in the work on dream 
interpretation by Artemidoros of Daldis¹. Here not only the dream-content, but also the 
personality and social position of the dreamer are taken into consideration, so that the 
same dream-content has a significance for the rich man, the married man, or the orator, 
which is different from that which applies to the poor man, the bachelor, or, let us say, 
the merchant. The essential point, then, in this procedure is that the work of 
interpretation is not applied to the entirety of the dream, but to each portion of the 
dream-content severally, as though the dream were a conglomerate in which each fragment 
calls for special treatment. Incoherent and confused dreams are certainly those that have 
been responsible for the
¹Artemidoros of Daldis, born probably in the beginning of the second century of our 
calendar, has furnished us with the .most complete and careful elaboration of 
dream-interpretation as it existed in the Graeco-Roman world. As Gompertz has emphasized, 
he ascribed great importance to the consideration that dreams ought to be interpreted on 
the basis of observation and experience, and he drew a definite line between his own art 
and other methods, which he considered fraudulent. The principle of his art of 
interpretation is, according to Gompertz, identical with that of magic: i.e., the 
principle of association. The thing dreamed meant what it recalled to the memory— to 
the memory, of course, of the dream-interpreter! This fact—that the dream may remind 
the interpreter of various things, and every interpreter of different things—leads, of 
course, to uncontrollable arbitrariness and uncertainty. The technique which I am about 
to describe differs from that of the ancients in one essential point, namely, in that it 
imposes upon the dreamer himself the work of interpretation. Instead of taking into 
account whatever may occur to the dream-interpreter, it considers only what occurs to the 
dreamer inconnection with the dream-element concerned. Accord ing to the recent records 
of the missionary, Tfinkdjit (Anthropos, 1913), it would seem that the modern 
dream-interpreters of the Orient likewise attribute much importance to the co-operation 
of the dreamer. Of the dream-interpreters among the Mesopotamian Arabs this writer 
relates as follows: "Pour interpreter exactement un songe les oniromanciens les plus 
habiles s'informent de ceux qui les consultent de toutes les circonstances qu'ils 
regardent nicessaires pour la bonne explication. . . . En un mot, nDs oniromanciens ne 
laissent aucune cirConstance leur ichapper et ne donnent Vinterpretation disirie avant 
d'avoir parfaitement saisi et recu toutes les interrogations desirables." [To interpret a 
dream exactly, the most practised interpreters of dreams learn from those who consult 
them all circumstances which they regard as necessary for a good explanation In a word, 
our interpreters allow no. circumstance to be overlooked and do not give the desired 
interpretation before perfectly taking and apprehending all desirable questions.] Among 
these questions one always finds demands for precise information in respect to near 
relatives (parents, wife, children) as well as the following formula: habistine in hoc 
node copulam conjugalem ante vel post somnium? [Did you this night have conjugal 
copulation before or after the dream?] "L'idie dominante dans Vinterpretation des songes 
consiste a expliquer le reve par son opposi." [The dominant idea in the interpretation of 
dreams consists in explaining the dream by its opposite.]
invention of the cipher method.²
The worthlessness of both these popular methods of interpretation does not admit of 
discussion. As regards the scientific treatment of the subject, the symbolic method is 
limited in its application, and is not susceptible of a general exposition. In the cipher 
method every thing depends upon whether the key, the dream-book, is reliable, and for 
that all guarantees are lacking. So that one might be tempted to grant the contention of 
the philosophers and psychiatrists, and to dismiss the problem of dream-interpretation as 
altogether fanciful.³
I have; however, come to think differently. I have been forced to perceive that here, 
once more, we have one of those not infrequent eases where an ancient and stubbornly 
retained popular belief seems to have come hearer to the truth of the matter than the 
opinion of modern science, I must insist that the dream actually does possess a meaning, 
and that a scientific method of dream-interpretation is possible. I arrived at my 
knowledge of this method in the following manner:
For years I have been occupied with the resolution of certain psycho-pathological 
structures—hysterical phobias, obsessional ideas, and the like—with therapeutic 
intentions. I have been so occupied, in fact, ever since I heard the significant 
statement of Joseph
²Dr. Alfred Robitsek calls my attention to the fact that Oriental dream-books, of which 
ours are pitiful, plagiarisms, commonly undertake the interpretation of dream-elements in 
accordance with the assonance and similarity of words.. Since these relationships must be 
lost by translation into our language, the incomprehensibility of the equivalents in our 
popular "dream-books" is hereby explained. Information as to the extraordinary 
significance of puns and the play upon words in the old Oriental Cultures may be found in 
the writings of Hugo Winckler. The finest example of a dream-interpretation which has 
come down to us from antiquity is based on a play upon words. Artemidoros relates the 
following (p. 225): "But it seems to: me that Aristandros gave a most happy 
interpretation to Alexander of Macedon. When the latter held Tyros encompassed and in a 
state of siege, and was angry, and depressed over the great waste of time, he dreamed 
that he saw a Satyr dancing on his shield. It happened that Aristandros was in the 
neighbourhood of Tyros, and in the escort of the king, who was waging war on the Syrians, 
By dividing the word Satyros into σὰ and Σὰ Τὺροϛ, he induced the king to 
become more aggressive in the siege. And thus Alexander became master of the city." 
(Σὰ Τὺροϛ=Thine is Tyros.) The dream, indeed, is so intimately connected with 
verbal expression that Ferenczi justly remarks that every tongue has its own 
dream-language. A dream is, as a rule, not to be translated into other languages.
³After the completion of my manuscript, a paper by Stumpf came to my notice which agrees 
with my work in attempting to prove that the dream is full of meaning and capable of 
interpretation. But the interpretation is undertaken by means of an allegorizing 
symbolism, and there is no guarantee that the procedure is generally applicable.

Breuer, to the effect that in these structures, regarded as morbid symptoms, solution and 
treatment go hand in hand.¹ Where it has. Been possible to trace a pathological idea 
back to those elements in the psychic life of the patient to which it owed its origin, 
this idea has crumbled away, and the patient has been relieved of it. In view of the 
failure of our other therapeutic efforts, and in the face of the mysterious character of 
these pathological conditions, it seemed to me tempting, in spite of all the 
difficulties, to follow the method initiated by Breuer until a complete elucidation of 
the subject had been achieved. I shall have occasion elsewhere to give a detailed account 
p£ the form which the technique of this procedure; has finally assumed, and of the 
results of my efforts. In the course of these psycho-analytic studies, I happened upon 
the question of dream-interpretation., My patients, after I had pledged them to inform me 
of all the ideas and thoughts which occurred to them in connection with a given theme, 
related their dreams, and thus taught me that a dream may be interpolated in the psychic 
concatenation, which may be followed backwards from a pathological idea into the 
patient's memory. The next step was to treat the dream itself as a symptom, and to apply, 
to it the, method of interpretation which had been worked out for such symptoms.
For this a certain psychic preparation on the part of the patient is necessary. A twofold 
effort is made, to stimulate his attentiveness in respect of his psychic perceptions, and 
to eliminate the critical spirit in which be is ordinarily in the habit of viewing such 
thoughts as Come to the surface. For the purpose of self-observation with concentrated 
attention it is advantageous that the patient should take up a restful position and close 
his eyes; he must be explicitly instructed to renounce all criticism of the 
thought-formations which he may perceive. He must also be told that the success of the 
psycho-analysis depends upon his noting and communicating everything that passes through 
his mind, and that he must not allow himself. to suppress one idea because it seems to 
him unimportant or irrelevant to the subject, or another because it seems nonsensical; He 
must preserve an absolute impartiality in respect to his ideas; for if he is unsuccessful 
in finding the desired solution of the dream, the obsessional idea, or the like, it will 
be because he permits himself to be critical of them.
¹Studien uber Hysterie, 1895. [Compare page 26 above.]
I have noticed in the course of my psycho-analytical work that the psychological state of 
a man in1 an attitude of reflection is entirely different from that of a man who is 
observing his psychic processes. In reflection there is a greater play of psychic 
activity than in the most attentive self-observation; this is shown even by the tense 
attitude and the wrinkled brow of the man in a state of reflection, as opposed to the 
mimic tranquillity of the man observing himself. In both cases there must be concentrated 
attention, but the reflective man makes use of his critical faculties, with the result 
that he rejects some of the thoughts which rise into consciousness after he has become 
aware of them, and abruptly interrupts others, so that he does not follow the lines of 
thought which they would otherwise open up for him; while in respect of yet other 
thoughts he is able to behave in such a manner that they do not become conscious at 
all—that is to say, they are suppressed before they are perceived. In self-observation, 
on the other hand, he has but the task—that of suppressing criticism; if he succeeds in 
doing this, an unlimited number of thoughts enter his consciousness which would otherwise 
have eluded his grasp. With the aid of the material thus obtained—material which is new 
to the self-observer—it is possible to achieve the interpretation of pathological 
ideas, and also that of dream-formations. As will be seen, the point is-to induce a 
psychic state which is in some degree analogous, as regards the distribution of psychic 
energy (mobile attention),to the state of the mind before falling asleep—-and also, of 
course, to the-hypnotic state. On falling asleep the undesired ideas emerge, owing to the 
slackening of a certain arbitrary (and, of course, also critical) action, which is 
allowed to influence the trend of our ideas; we are accustomed to speak of fatigue as the 
reason of this slackening; the emerging undesired ideas are changed into visual and 
auditory images. In the condition which it utilized for the analysis of dreams and 
pathological ideas, this activity is purposely and deliberately renounced, and the 
psychic energy thus saved (or some part of it) is employed in attentively tracking , the 
undesired thoughts; which now come to the surface—thoughts which retain their identity 
as ideas (in which the condition differs from the state of falling asleep). Undesired 
ideas are thus changed into desired ones.
There are many people who do not seem to find it easy to adopt the required attitude 
toward the apparently "freely rising" ideas, and to renounce the criticism which is 
otherwise applied to them. The "undesired ideas" habitually evoke the most violent 
resistance, which seeks to prevent them from coming to the surface. But if we may credit 
our great poet philosopher Friedrich Schiller, the essential condition of poetical 
creation includes a very similar attitude. In a certain passage in his correspondence 
with Korner (for the tracing of which we are indebted to Otto Rank), Schiller replies in 
the following words to a friend who complains of his lack of creative power: "The reason 
for your complaint lies, it seems to me, in the constraint which your intellect imposes 
upon your imagination. Here I will make an observation, and illustrate it by an allegory. 
Apparently it is not good—and indeed it hinders the creative work of the mind—if the 
intellect examines too closely the ideas already pouring in, as it were, at the gates. 
Regarded in isolation, an idea may be quite insignificant, and venturesome in the 
extreme, but it may acquire importance from an idea which follows it; perhaps, in a 
certain collocation with other ideas, which may seem equally absurd, it may be capable of 
furnishing a very serviceable link. The intellect cannot judge all these ideas unless it 
can retain them until it has considered them in connection with these other ideas. In the 
case of a creative mind, it seems to me; the intellect has withdrawn its watchers from 
the gates, and the ideas rush in pell-mell, and only then does it review and inspect the 
multitude. You worthy critics, or whatever you may call yourselves, are ashamed or afraid 
of the momentary and passing madness which is found in all real creators, the longer or 
shorter duration of which distinguishes the thinking artist from the dreamer. Hence your 
complaints of unfruitfulness, for you reject too soon and discriminate too severely" 
(letter of December i, 1788).
And yet, such a withdrawal of the watchers from the gates of the intellect, as Schiller 
puts it, such a translation into the condition of uncritical self-observation, is by no 
means difficult. 
Most of my patients accomplish it after my first instructions. I myself can do so very 
completely, if I assist the process by writing down the ideas that flash through my mind. 
The quantum of psychic energy by which the critical activity is thus reduced, and by 
which the in tensity of self-observation may be increased, varies considerably according  
to the subject matter upon which the attention is to he fixed.
The first step in the application of this procedure teaches us that one cannot make the 
dream as a whole the object of one's attention but only the individual components of its 
content. If I ask a patient who is as yet unpractised: "What occurs to you in connection 
with this dream?" he is unable, as a rule, to fix upon anything in his psychic field of 
vision. I must first dissect the dream for him; then, in connection with each fragment, 
he gives me a number of ideas which may be described as the thoughts behind this part of 
the dream. In this first and important condition, then, the method of 
dream-interpretation which I employ diverges from the popular, historical and legendary 
method of interpretation by symbolism and approaches more nearly to the second or cipher 
method. Like this, it is an interpretation in detail, not en masse; like this, it 
conceives the dream, from the outset, as something built up, as a conglomerate of psychic 
formations. 
In the course of my psycho-analysis of neurotics I have already subjected perhaps more 
than a thousand dreams to interpretation, but I do not wish to use this material now as 
an introduction to the theory and technique of dream-interpretation. For quite apart from 
the fact that I should lay myself open to the objection that these are the dreams of 
neuropaths, so that the conclusions drawn from them would not apply to the dreams of 
healthy persons, there is another reason that impels me to reject them. The theme to 
which these dreams point is, of course, always the history of the malady that is 
responsible for the neurosis. Hence every dream would require a very long introduction, 
and an investigation of the nature and aetiological conditions of the psychoneuroses, 
matters which are in themselves novel-and exceedingly strange, and which would, therefore 
distract attention. from the dream-problem proper. My purpose is rather to prepare the 
way, by the solution of the dream-problem, for the solution of the more difficult 
problems of the psychology of the neuroses. But if I eliminate the dreams of neurotics, 
which constitute my principal material, I cannot be too fastidious in my treatment of the 
rest. Only those dreams are left which have been incidentally related to me by healthy 
per sons of my acquaintance, or which I find given as examples in the literature of 
dream-life. Unfortunately, in all these dreams I am deprived of the analysis without 
which I cannot find: the meaning of the dream. My mode of procedure is, of course, less 
easy than that of the popular. cipher method, which translates the given dream-content by 
reference to an established key; I, on the contrary, hold that the same dream-content may 
conceal a different meaning in the case of different persons, or in different 
connections. I must, therefore, resort to my own dreams as a source of abundant and 
convenient material, furnished by a person who is more or less normal, and containing 
references to many incidents of every day life. I shall certainly be confronted with 
doubts as to the trustworthiness of these self-analyses and it will be said that 
arbitrariness is by no means excluded in such analyses. In my own judgment, conditions 
are more likely to be favourable in self observation than in the observation of others; 
in any case, it is permissible to investigate how much can be accomplished in the matter 
of dream-interpretation by means of self-analysis. There are other difficulties which 
must be overcome in my own inner self. One has a comprehensible aversion to exposing so 
many intimate details of one's own psychic life, and one does not feel secure against the 
misinterpretations of strangers. But one must be able to transcend such considerations. 
"Tout psychologiste," writes Delbceuf, "est oblige de faire Vaveu meme de ses faiblesses 
s'il croit par Id jeter du jour sur quelque probleme obscur."¹ And I may assume for the 
reader that his initial interest in the indiscretions which I must commit will very soon 
give way to an exclusive engrossment in the psychological problems elucidated by them.²
I shall therefore select one of my own dreams for the purpose of elucidating my method of 
interpretation. Every such dream necessitates a preliminary statement; so that I must now 
beg the reader to make my interests his own for a time, and to become absorbed, with me, 
in the most trifling details of my life; for an interest in the hidden significance of 
dreams imperatively demands just such a transference. 
Preliminary Statement
In the summer of 1895. I had treated psychoanalytically a young lady who was an intimate 
friend of mine and of my family. It will be understood that such complicated relations may
¹Every psychologist is obliged to admit even his own weaknesses, if he thinks by that he 
may throw light on a difficult problem.—Ed.
²However, I will not omit to mention, in qualification of the above statement, that I 
have practically never reported a complete interpretation of a dream of my own. And I was 
probably right hot to trust too far to the reader's discretion.

excite manifold feelings in the physician, and especially the psychotherapist. The 
personal interest of the physician is greater, but bis authority less. If he fails, his 
friendship with the patient's relatives is in danger of being undermined. In this case, 
however, the treatment ended in partial success; the patient was cured of her hysterical 
anxiety, but not of all her somatic symptoms. At that time I was not yet quite sure of 
the criteria which denote the final cure of an hysterical case, and I expected he to 
accept a solution which did not seem accept able to her. In the midst of this 
disagreement, we discontinued the treatment for the summer holidays. One day a younger 
colleague, one of my most intimate friends, who had visited the patient—Irma—and her 
family in their country residence, called upon me. I asked him how Irma was and received 
the reply: "She is better, but not quite well." I realize that these words of my friend 
Otto's, or the tone of voice in which they were spoken, annoyed me. I thought I beard a 
reproach in the words, perhaps to the effect that I had promised the patient too much, 
and—rightly or wrongly—I at tributed Otto's apparent taking sides against me to the 
influence of the patient's relatives, who, I assumed, had never approved of my treatment. 
This disagreeable impression, how ever, did not become clear to me, nor did I speak of 
it. That same evening I wrote the clinical history of Irma's case, in order to give it, 
as though to justify myself, to Dr, M, a mutual friend, who was at that time the leading 
personality in our circle. During the night (or rather in the early morning) I had the 
following dream, which I recorded immediately after waking.³
Dream of July 23—24, 1895
A great hall—a number of guests, whom we are receiving—among them Irma, whom I 
immediately take aside, as though to answer her letter, and to reproach her for not yet 
accepting the "solution." I say to her: "If you still have pains, it is really only your 
own fault."—She answers: "If you only knew what, pains I have now in the throat, 
stomach, and abdomen—I am choked by them" I am startled, and look at her. She looks 
pale and puffy. I think that after all I must be overlooking some organic affection. I 
take her to the window and look into her throat. She, offers some resistance Jo. this, 
like a woman who has a set of false teeth. I
³This is the first dream which I subjected to an exhaustive interpretation.
think, surely, she doesn't need them.—The mouth then opens- wide, and I find a large 
white spot on the right, and elsewhere I see extensive grayish-white scabs adhering to 
curiously curled formations, which are evidently shaped like the turbinal bones of the 
nose.— I quickly call Dr. M, who repeats the examination and confirms it Dr. M looks 
quite un like his usual self; he is very pale, he limps, and his chin is clean-shaven Now 
my friend Otto, too, is standing beside her, and my friend Leopold percusses her covered 
chest, and says "She has a dullness below, on the left," and also calls attention to an 
infiltrated portion of skin on the left shoulder (which I can feel, in spite of the 
dress)....M says: "There's no doubt that it's an infection, but it doesn't matter; 
dysentery will follow and the poison will be eliminated.".. .We know, too, precisely how 
the infection originated. My friend Otto, not long ago, gave her, when she was feeling 
unwell, an injection of a preparation of propyl—propyls. . .propionic acid.. 
.trimethylamin (the formula of which I see before me, printed in heavy type). ...One 
doesn't give such injections so rashly...Probably, too, the syringe was not clean.
This dream has an advantage over many others. It is at once obvious to what events of the 
preceding day it is related, and of what subject it treats. The preliminary statement 
explains these matters. The news of Irma's health which I had received from Otto, and the 
clinical history, which I was writing late into the night, had occupied my psychic 
activities even during sleep. Nevertheless, no one who had read the preliminary report, 
and had knowledge of the content of the dream, could guess what the dream signified. Nor 
do I myself know. I am puzzled by the morbid symptoms of which Irma complains in the 
dream, for they are not the symptoms for which I treated her. I smile at the nonsensical 
idea of an injection of propionic acid, and at Dr. M's attempt at consolation. Towards 
the end the dream seems more obscure and quicker in tempo than at the beginning. In order 
to learn the significance of all these details I resolve to undertake an exhaustive 
analysis.
Analysis
The hall—a number of guests, whom we are receiving. We were living that summer at 
Bellevue, an isolated house On one of the hills adjoining the Kahlenberg. This house was 
originally built as a place of entertainment, and therefore has unusually lofty, 
hall-like rooms. The dream was dreamed in Bellevue,' a few days before my wife's 
birthday. During the day my wife had mentioned that she expected several friends, and 
among them Irma, to come to us as guests for her birthday. My dream, then, anticipates 
this situation: It is my wife's birthday, and we are receiving a number of people, among 
them Irma, as guests in the large hall of Bellevue.
I reproach Irma for not having accepted the "solution." I say, "If you still have pains, 
it is really your own fault." I might even have said this while awake; I may have 
actually said it. At that. time I was-of the opinion,(recognized later to be incorrect) 
that my task was limited to informing patients of the hidden meaning of their symptoms. 
Whether they then accepted or did not accept the solution upon which success 
depended—for that I was not responsible. I am grateful to this error, which, 
fortunately, has now been overcome, since it made life easier for me at a time when, with 
all my unavoidable ignorance, I was expected to effect successful cures. But I note that, 
in the speech which I make to Irma in the dream, I am above all anxious that I shall not 
be blamed for the pains which she still suffers. If it is Irma's own fault, it cannot be: 
mine. Should the purpose of the dream be looked for in this quarter?
Irma's complaints-^-pains in the neck, abdomen, and stomach; she is choked by them. Pains 
in the stomach belonged to the symptom complex of my patient, but they were not very 
prominent;' she complained rather of qualms and a feeling of nausea. Pains in the neck 
arid abdomen and constriction of the throat played hardly any part in her case. I wonder 
why I have decided upon this choice of symptoms in the dream; for the moment I cannot 
discover the reason.
She looks pale and puffy. My patient had always a rosy complexion. I suspect that here 
another person is being substituted for her. 
I am startled at the idea that I may have overlooked some organic affection. This, as the 
reader will readily believe, is a constant fear with the specialist who sees neurotics 
almost exclusively, and who is accustomed to ascribe to hysteria so many manifestations 
which other physicians treat as organic. On the other hand, I am haunted by a faint 
doubt—I do not know whence it comes—whether my alarm is alto gether honest. If Irma's 
pains are indeed of organic origin, it is riot my duty to cure them; My treatment, of 
course; removes only hysterical pains. It seems to me, in fact, that I wish to find an 
error in the diagnosis; for then I could not be reproached with failure to effect a cure.
I take her to the window in order to look into her throat. She resists a little, like a 
woman who has false- teeth. I think to myself, she does not need them. I had never had 
occasion to inspect Irma's oral cavity. The incident in the dream reminds me of an 
examination, made sometime before, of a governess who at first produced an impression of 
youthful beauty, but who, upon opening her mouth, took certain measures to conceal her 
denture. Other memories of medical examinations; and of petty secrets revealed by them, 
to the embarrassment of both physician and patient, associate them selves with this 
case.—"She surely does not need them," is perhaps in the first place a compliment to 
Irma; but I suspect yet another meaning. In a careful-analysis one is able to feel 
whether or not the arriere-pensees which are to be expected have all been exhausted. The 
way in which Irma stands at the window suddenly reminds me of another experience. Irma 
has an intimate woman friend of whom I think very highly. One evening, on paying her a 
visit, I found her at the window in the position reproduced in the dream, and her 
physician, the same Dr. M, declared that she had a diphtheritic membrane. The person of 
Dr. M and the membrane return, indeed, in the course of the dream. Now it occurs to me 
that during the past few months I have had every reason to suppose that this lady too is 
hysterical. Yes, Irma herself betrayed the fact to me. But what do I know of. her 
condition? Only the one thing, that like Irma in the dream she suffers from hysterical 
choking. Thus, in the dream I have replaced my patient by her, friend. Now I remember 
that I have often played with the supposition, that this lady, too, might ask me to 
relieve her of her symptoms. But even at the time I thought it improbable, since she is 
extremely reserved. She resists, as the dream shows. Another explanation might be that 
she does not need it; in fact, until now she has shown herself strong enough to master 
her condition without outside help. Now only a few features remain which J can assign 
neither to Irma nor to her friend;- pale, puffy, false teeth. The false teeth led me to 
the governess; I now feel, inclined to, be satisfied with bad teeth. Here another person, 
to whom these features may-allude; occurs to me; She is not my patient and I do not wish 
her to be my patient, for I have noticed that she is>not at her ease with me, and I do 
not consider her a docile patient., She is generally pale, and once, when she had not 
felt particularly well, she was puffy.¹ I have thus compared my patient Irma with two 
others, who. would likewise resist treatment. What is the meaning of the fact that I have 
exchanged her for her friend in the dream? Perhaps that I wish to exchange her; either 
her friend arouses in me stronger sympathies, or I have a higher regard for her 
intelligence. For I consider Irma foolish because she does not accept my solution. The 
other woman would be more sensible, and would thus be more likely to yield. The mouth 
then opens readily; she would tell more than Irma.²
What I see in the throat: a white spot and scabby turbinal bones. The white spot recalls 
diphtheria, and thus Irma's friend, but it also recalls the grave illness of my eldest 
daughter two years earlier, and all the anxiety of that unhappy time. The scab on the 
turbinal bones reminds me of my anxiety concerning my own health. At that time I 
frequently used cocaine; in order to suppress distressing swellings in the. nose, and I 
had heard a few days previously that a lady patient who did likewise had contracted an 
extensive necrosis of the nasal mucous membrane. In 1885 it was I who had recommended the 
use of cocaine, and I had been, gravely reproached in consequence. A dear, friend, who 
had died before the date of this dream, had hastened his end by the misuse of this remedy.
I quickly call Dr. M, who repeats the examination. This would simply correspond to the! 
position which M occupied among us. But the word quickly is striking enough to demand a; 
special examination. It reminds me of a sad medical experience. By continually 
prescribing a drug, (sulphonal), which at that time was still considered harmless, I was 
once responsible for a condition of acute poisoning in the
¹The complaint of pains, in the abdomen, as yet unexplained, may also be. referred to 
this third person It is my own wife, of course, who is in question; the abdominal pains 
remind me of one of the occasions on which her shyness, became evident to me., I must 
admit that I do not treat Irma and my wife very gallantly in this dream, but let it be 
said, in my defence, that I am measuring both of them against the ideal of the courageous 
and docile female patient.
²I suspect that the interpretation of this portion has not been carried far-enough to 
follow every hidden meaning. If I were to continue the comparison of the three women, I 
should go far afield. Every dream has at least one point at which it is unfathomable; a 
central point, as it were, connecting it with the unknown.

case of a woman patient, and hastily turned for assistance to my older and more 
experienced colleague. The fact that I really had this case in mind is confirmed by a 
subsidiary circumstance. The patient, who succumbed to the toxic effects of the drug, 
bore the same name as my eldest daughter. I had never thought of this until now; but now 
it seems to me almost like a retribution of fate—as though the substitution of persons 
had to be continued in another sense: this Matilda for that Matilda; an eye for an eye, a 
tooth for a tooth. It is as though I were seeking every opportunity to reproach myself 
for a lack of medical conscientiousness.
Dr. M is pale; his chin is shaven, and he limps. Of this so much is correct, that his 
unhealthy appearance often arouses the concern of his friends. The other two 
characteristics must belong to another person. An elder brother living abroad occurs to 
me for he, too, shaves his chin, and if I remember him rightly, the M of the dream bears 
on the whole a certain resemblance to him. And some days previously the news arrived that 
he was limping on account of an arthritic affection of the. hip. There must be some 
reason why I fuse the two persons into one in my dream. I remember that, in fact, I was 
on bad terms with both of them for similar reasons. Both had rejected a certain proposal 
which I had recently made them.
My friend Otto is now standing next to the patient, and my friend Leopold examines her 
and calls attention to a dulness low down on the left side. My friend Leopold also is a 
physician, and a relative of Otto's. Since the two practice the same specialty, fate has 
made them competitors, so that they are constantly being compared with one another. Both 
of them assisted me for years, while I was still directing, a public clinic for neurotic 
children. There, scenes like that reproduced in my dream had often taken place. While I 
would be discussing the diagnosis of a case with Qtto, Leopold would examine the child 
anew and make an unexpected contribution towards our decision. There was a difference of 
character between the two men like that between Inspector Brasig and his friend Karl. 
Otto was remarkably prompt and alert; Leopold was slow and thoughtful, but thorough. If I 
contrast Otto and the cautious Leopold in the dream I do so, apparently, in order to 
extol Leopold. The conv parison is like that made above between the disobedient patient 
Irma and her friend, who was believed to be more sensible. I now become aware of one of 
the tracks along which the association of ideas in the dream proceeds: from the sick 
child to the children's clinic. Concerning the dulness low on the left side, I have the 
impression that it corresponds with a certain case of which all the details were similar, 
a case in which Leopold impressed me by his thoroughness. I thought vaguely, too, of 
something like a metastatic affection, but it might also be a reference to the patient 
whom I should have liked to have in Irma's place. For this lady, as far as I can gather, 
exhibited symptoms which imitated tuberculosis.
An infiltrated portion of skin on the left shoulder. I know at once that this is my own 
rheumatism of the shoulder, which I always feel if I lie awake long at night. The very 
phrasing of the dream sounds ambiguous: Something- which I can feel, as he does, in spite 
of the dress. "Feel on my own body" is intended. Further, it occurs to me how unusual the 
phrase infiltrated portion of skin sounds. We are accustomed to the phrase: "an 
infiltration of the upper posterior left”; this would refer to the lungs, and thus; 
once more, to tuberculosis.
In spite of the dress. This, to be sure, is only an interpolation. At. the clinic the 
children were, of course, examined undressed; here we have some contrast to the manner in 
which adult female patients have to be examined. The story used to be told of an eminent 
physician that he always Examined his patients through their clothes. The rest is obscure 
to me; I have, frankly, no inclination to follow the matter further.
Dr. M says: "It's an infection, but it doesn't matter; dysentery will follow, and the 
poison will be eliminated." This, at first, seems to me ridiculous; nevertheless, like 
everything else, it must be carefully analysed; more closely observed it seems after all 
to have a sort of meaning. What I had found in the patient was a local diphtheritis. I 
remember the discussion about diphtheritis and diphtheria at the time of my daughter's 
illness. Diphtheria is the general infection which proceeds from local diphtheritis. 
Leopold demonstrates the existence of such a general infection by the dulness, which also 
suggests a metastatic focus. I believe, how ever, that just this kind of metastasis does 
not occur in the case of diphtheria. It reminds me rather of pyaemia.
It doesn't matter is a consolation. I believe it fits in as follows: The last part of the 
dream has yielded a content to the effect that the patient's sufferings are the result of 
a serious organic affection. I begin to suspect that by this I am only trying to shift 
the blame from my self. Psychic treatment cannot be held responsible for the continued 
presence of a diphtheritic affection. Now, indeed, I am distressed by the thought of 
having invented such a serious illness for Irma, for the sole purpose of ex culpating 
myself. It seems so cruel. Accordingly, I need the assurance that the outcome will be 
benign, and it seems to me that I made a good choice when I put the words that con soled 
me into the mouth of Dr. M. But here I am placing myself in a position of superiority to 
the dream; a fact which needs explanation;
But why is this consolation so nonsensical? Dysentery. Some sort of farfetched 
theoretical notion that the toxins of disease might be eliminated through the intestines. 
Am I thereby trying to make fun of Dr. M's remark able store of far-fetched explanations, 
his habit of conceiving curious pathological relations?
Dysentery suggests something else. A few months ago I had in my care a young man who was 
suffering from remarkable intestinal troubles; a case which had been treated by other 
colleagues as one of "anaemia with malnutrition." I realized that it was a case of 
hysteria; I was unwilling to use my psycho-therapy on him, and sent him off on a 
sea-voyage. Now a few days previously I had received a despairing letter from him; he 
wrote from Egypt, saying that he had had a fresh attack, which the doctor had declared to 
be dysentery. I suspect that the diagnosis is merely an error on the part of an ignorant 
colleague, who is allowing himself to be fooled by the hysteria; yet I can not help 
reproaching myself for putting the invalid in a position where he might contract some 
organic affection of the bowels in addition to his hysteria. Furthermore, dysentery 
sounds not unlike diphtheria, a word which does not occur in the dream.
Yes, it must be the case that with the con soling prognosis, Dysentery will develop, 
etc., I am making fun of Dr. M, for I recollect that years ago he once jestingly told a 
very similar story of a colleague. He had been called in to consult with him in the case 
of a woman who was very seriously ill, and he felt obliged to confront his colleague, who 
seemed very hopeful, with the fact that he found albumen in the patient's urine. His 
colleague, however, did not allow this to worry him, but answered calmly: "That does not 
matter, my dear sir; the albumen will soon be excreted!" Thus I can no longer doubt that 
this part of the dream expresses derision for those of my colleagues who are ignorant of 
hysteria. And, as though in-confirmation; the thought enters my mind: "Does Dr. M know 
that the appearances in Irma's friend, his patient, which gave him reason to fear 
tuberculosis, are likewise due to hysteria? Has he recognized this hysteria, or has he 
allowed himself to be fooled?"
But what can be my motive in treating this friend so badly? That is simple enough: Dr. M 
agrees with my solution as little as does Irma herself. Thus, in this dream I have 
already revenged myself on two persons: on Irma in the words, If you still have pains, it 
is your own fault, and on Dr. M in the wording of the nonsensical consolation which has 
been put into his mouth. 
We know precisely how the infection originnated. This precise knowledge in the dream is 
remarkable. Only a moment before this we did not yet know of the infection, since it was 
first demonstrated by Leopold.
My friend Otto gave her an injection not long ago, when she was feeling unwell. Otto had 
actually related during his short visit to Irma's family that he had been called in to a 
neighbouring hotel in order to give an injection to someone who had, been suddenly taken 
ill. Injections remind me once more of the unfortunate friend who poisoned himself with 
cocaine. I had recommended the remedy for internal use only during the withdrawal of 
morphia; but he immediately gave himself injections of cocaine.
With a preparation of propyl... propyls . propionic acid. How on earth did this occur to: 
me? On the evening of the day after I had written the clinical history and dreamed about 
the case, my wife opened a bottle of liqueur labelled "Ananas,"¹ which was a present 
from our friend Otto. He had, as a matter of fact, a habit of making presents on every 
possible! occasion; I hope he will someday be cured of' this by a wife.² This liqueur 
smelt so strongly of fusel oil that I refused to drink it. My wife suggested: "We will 
give the bottle to the servants," and I, more prudent, objected, with the philanthropic 
remark: "They shan't be
¹"Ananas," moreover, has a remarkable assonance with the family name of my patient Irma.
²In this the dream did not turn out to be prophetic. But in another sense it proved 
correct, for the "un solved" stomach pains, for which I did not want to be blamed, were 
the forerunners of a serious illness, due to gall-stones.

poisoned either." The smell of fusel oil (amyl . . .) has now apparently awakened 
my-memory of the whole series: propyl, methyl, etc., which furnished the preparation of 
propyl mentioned in the dream. Here, indeed, I have effected a substitution: I dreamt of 
propyl after smelling amyl; but substitutions of this kind are perhaps permissible, 
especially in organic chemistry.
Trimethylamin. In the dream I see the chemical formula of this substance—which at all 
events is evidence of a great effort on the part of my memory—and the formula is even 
printed in heavy type, as though to distinguish it from the context as something of 
particular importance. And where does trimethylamin, thus forced on my attention, lead 
me? To a conversation with another friend, who for years has been familiar with all my 
germinating ideas, and I with his. At that time he had just informed me of certain ideas 
concerning a sexual chemistry, and had mentioned, among others, that he thought he had 
found in trimethylamin one of the products of sexual metabolism. This substance thus 
leads me to sexuality, the factor to which I attribute the greatest significance in 
respect of the origin of these nervous affections which I am trying to cure. My patient 
Irma is a young widow; if I am required to excuse my failure to cure her, I shall perhaps 
do best to refer to this condition, which her admirers would be glad to terminate. But in 
what a singular fashion such a dream is fitted together! The friend who in my dream 
becomes my patient in Irma's place is likewise a young widow.
I surmise why it is that the formula of trimethylamin is so insistent in the dream. So 
many important things are centered about this one word: trimethylamin is an allusion, not 
merely to the all-important factor of sexuality, but also to a friend whose sympathy I 
remember with satisfaction whenever I feel isolated in my opinions. And this friend, who 
plays such a large part in my life: will he not appear yet again in the concatenation of 
ideas peculiar to this dream? Of course; he has a special knowledge of the results of 
affections of the nose and the sinuses, and has revealed to science several highly 
remarkable relations between the turbinal bones and the female sexual organs. (The three 
curly formations in Irma's throat.) I got him to examine Irma, in order to determine 
whether her gastric pains were of nasal origin. But he himself suffers from suppurative 
rhinitis, which gives me concern, and to this perhaps there is an allusion in pyaemia, 
which hovers  before  me in the metastasis of the dream.
One doesn't give such injections so rashly. Here the reproach of rashness is hurled 
directly at my friend Otto. I believe I had some such thought in the afternoon, when he 
seemed to indicate, by word and look, that he had taken sides against me. It was, 
perhaps: "How easily he is influenced; how irresponsibly he pronounces judgment." 
Further, the above sentence points once more to my deceased friend, who so irresponsibly 
resorted to cocaine injections. As I have said, I had not intended that injections of the 
drug should be taken: I note that in reproaching Otto I once more touch upon the story of 
the unfortunate Matilda, which was the pretext for the same reproach against me. Here, 
obviously, I am collecting examples of my conscientiousness, and also of the reverse.
Probably too the syringe was not clean. An other reproach directed at Otto, but 
originating elsewhere. On the previous day I happened to meet the son of an old lady of 
eighty-two, to whom I am obliged to give two injections of morphia daily. At present she 
is in the country, and I have heard that she is suffering from phlebitis. I immediately 
thought that this might be a case of infiltration caused by a dirty syringe. It is my 
pride that in two years I have not given her a single infiltration; I am always careful, 
of course, to see that the syringe is perfectly clean. For I am conscientious. From the 
phlebitis I return to my wife, who once suffered from thrombosis during a period of 
pregnancy, and now three related situations come to the surface in my memory, involving 
my wife, Irma, and the dead Matilda, whose identity has apparently justified my putting 
these three persons in one another's places.
I have now completed the interpretation of the dream.¹ In the course of this 
interpretation I have taken great pains to avoid all those notions which must have been 
suggested by a comparison of the dream-content with the dream-thoughts hidden behind this 
content. Meanwhile the meaning of the dream has dawned upon me. I have noted an intention 
which is realized through the dream, and which must have been my motive in dreaming. The 
dream fulfills several wishes, which were awakened within me by the events of the previous
¹Even if I have not, as might be expected, accounted for everything that occurred to 
me.in connection with the work of interpretation.
evening (Otto's news, and the writing of the clinical history). For the result of the 
dream is that it is not I who am to blame for the pain which Irma is still suffering, but 
that Otto is to blame for it. Now Otto has annoyed me by his remark about Irma's 
imperfect cure; the dream avenges me upon him; in that it turns the reproach upon 
himself. The dream acquits me of responsibility for Irma's condition, as it refers this 
condition "to other causes (which do, in deed, furnish quite a number of explanations). 
The dream represents a certain state of affairs, such as I might wish to exist; the 
content of the dream is thus the fulfilment of a wish; its motive is a wish.
This much is apparent at first sight. But many other details of the dream become 
intelligible when regarded from the standpoint of wish-fulfilment. I take my revenge on 
Otto, not merely for too readily taking sides against me, in that I accuse him of 
careless medical treatment (the injection), but I revenge myself also for the bad liqueur 
which smells of fusel oil, and I find an expression in the dream which unites both these 
reproaches: the injection of a preparation of propyl. Still I am not satisfied, but 
continue to avenge myself by comparing him with his more reliable colleague. Thereby I 
seem to say: "I like him better than you." But Otto is not the only person who must be 
made to feel the weight of my anger. I take my revenge on the disobedient patient, by 
exchanging her for a more sensible and more docile one. Nor do I pass over Dr. M's 
contradiction; for I express, in an obvious allusion, my opinion of him: namely, that his 
attitude in this case; is that of an ignoramus (Dysentery: will develop, etc.). Indeed, 
it seems as though I were appealing from him to someone better informed (my friend, who 
told me about trimethylamin), just as I have turned from Irma to her friend, and from 
Otto to Leopold. It is as though I were to say: Rid me of these three persons, replace 
them by three., others of my own choice, and I shall be rid of the reproaches which I am 
not willing to admit that I deserve! In my dream the unreasonableness of these reproaches 
is demonstrated for me in the most elaborate manner. Irma's pains are not attributable to 
me, since she herself is to blame for them, in that she refuses to accept my solution. 
They do not concern me, for being as they are of an organic nature, their cannot possibly 
be cured by psychic treatment. Irma's sufferings are satisfactorily explained by her 
widowhood (trimethylamin!); a state which I cannot alter. Irma's illness has been caused 
by an incautious injection administered by Otto, an injection of an unsuitable drug, such 
as I should never have administered. Irma's complaint is the result Of an injection made 
with an unclean syringe, like the phlebitis of my old lady patient, whereas my injections 
have never caused any ill effects. I am aware that these explanations of Irma's illness, 
which unite in acquitting me, do not agree with one another; that they even exclude one 
another. The whole plea—for this dream is nothing else—recalls vividly the defence 
offered by a man who was accused by his neighbour of haying returned a; kettle in a 
damaged condition. In the first place, he had returned the kettle undamaged; in the 
second place it already had holes in it when he borrowed it; and in the third place, he 
had never borrowed it at all. A complicated; defence, but so much the better; if only one 
of these three lines of defence is recognized as valid, the man must be acquitted. 
Still other themes play a part in the dreamy and their relation to my non-responsibility 
for Irma's illness is not so apparent: my daughter's illness, and that of a patient with 
the same name; the harmfulness of cocaine; the affection of my patient, who was traveling 
in Egypt; concern about the health of my wife; my brother, and Dr. M; my own physical 
troubles, and anxiety concerning my absent friend, who; is suffering from suppurative 
rhinitis. But if I keep all these things in view, they combine in4 to a single train of 
thought, which might be labelled: Concern for the health of myself and others; 
professional conscientiousness. I recall a vaguely disagreeable feeling when Otto gave me 
the news of Irma's condition. Lastly, I am inclined, after the event, to find an 
expression of this fleeting sensation in the train of thoughts which forms part of the 
dream. It is as though Otto had said to me: "You do not take your medical duties 
seriously enough; you are not conscientious; you do not perform what you promise." 
Thereupon this train of: thought placed; itself at my service, in order that I might give 
proof of my extreme conscientious ness, of my intimate concern about the health of my 
relatives, friends and patients. Curiously enough, there are also some painful memories 
in this material, which confirm the blame attached to Otto rather than my own 
exculpation. The material is apparently impartial, but: the connection between this 
broader material, on which the dream, is based, and the more limited theme from which 
emerges the wish to be innocent of Irma's illness, is; nevertheless, unmistakable.
I do not wish to assert that I have entirely revealed the meaning of the dream, or that 
my interpretation is flawless. 
I could still spend much time upon it; I could draw further explanations from it, and 
discuss further problems which it seems to propound. I can even perceive the points from 
which further mental associations might be traced; but such considerations as are always 
involved in every dream of one's own prevent me from interpreting it farther. Those who 
are overready to condemn such reserve should make the experiment of trying to be more 
straightforward. For the present I am content with the one fresh discovery which has just 
been made: If the method of dream-interpretation here indicated is followed^ it will be 
found that dreams do really possess a meaning, and are by no means the expression of a 
disintegrated cerebral activity, as the writers on the subject would have us believe. 
When the work of interpretation has been completed the dream can be recognized as a wish 
fulfilment.
III. The Dream as Wish-Fulfilment
When, after passing through a narrow defile, one suddenly reaches a height beyond which 
the ways part and a rich prospect lies outspread in different directions, it is well to 
stop for a moment and consider whither one shall turn next. We are in somewhat the same 
position after we have mastered this first interpretation of a dream. We find ourselves 
standing in the light of a sudden discovery. The dream is not comparable to the irregular 
sounds of a musical instrument, which, instead of being played by the hand of a musician, 
is struck by some external force; the dream is not meaningless, not absurd, does not 
presuppose that one part of our store of ideas is dormant while another part begins to 
awake. It is a perfectly valid psychic phenomenon, actually a wish-fulfillment; it may be 
enrolled in the continuity of the intelligible psychic activities of the waking state; it 
is built up by a highly complicated intellectual activity. But at the very moment when we 
are about to rejoice in this discovery a host of problems besets us. If the dream, as 
this theory defines it; represents a fulfilled wish, what is the cause of the striking 
and unfamiliar manner in which this fulfilment is expressed? What transformation has 
occurred in our dream-thoughts before the manifest dream, as we remember it on waking, 
shapes itself out of them? How has this transformation taken place? Whence- comes the 
material that is worked up into the dream? What causes many of the peculiarities which 
are to be observed in our dream-thoughts; for example, how is it. that they, are. able to 
contradict one another? Is the dream capable of teaching us something new concerning our 
internal psychic processes and can its content correct opinions which we have held during 
the day? I suggest that for the present all these problems be laid aside, and that a 
single path be pursued. We have found that the dream represents a wish as fulfilled. Our 
next purpose should be to as certain whether this is a general characteristic of dreams, 
or whether it is only the accidental content of: the particular dream; (the dream about 
Irma's injection) with: which we have begun our analysis;, for even if we conclude that 
every dream has a meaning and psychic value, we must nevertheless allow for the 
possibility that this meaning may not be the same in every dream. The first dream-which 
we have considered was the fulfilment of a wish; another may turn put to be the 
realization of an apprehension; a third may have a reflection as its content; a fourth 
may simply reproduce a reminiscence. Are there, then dreams other than wish-dreams; or 
are there none but wish dreams?
It is easy to show that the wish-fulfilment in dreams is often undisguised and easy to 
recognize, so that one may wonder why the language of dreams has not long since been 
understood. There is, for example, a dream which I can evoke as often as I please, 
experimentally, as it were. If, in the evening, I eat anchovies, olives, or other 
strongly salted foods, I am thirsty.at night, and therefore I wake. The waking, however, 
is preceded by a dream, which has always the same content, namely, that I am drinking. I 
am drinking long draughts of water; it tastes as delicious as only a cool drink can taste 
when one's throat is parched; and then I wake, and find that I have an actual desire to 
drink. The cause of this dream is thirst, which I perceive when I wake. From this 
sensation arises the wish to drink, and the dream shows me this wish; as fulfilled. It 
there by serves a function; the nature of which I soon surmise. I sleep well, and am not 
accustomed to being waked by a bodily need. If I succeed in appeasing my thirst by means 
of the dream that I.am drinking, I need not wake up in order to satisfy that thirst. It 
is thus a dream of convenience. The dream takes the place of action, as elsewhere in 
life. Unfortunately, the need of water to quench the thirst cannot be satisfied by a 
dream, as can my thirst for revenge upon Otto and Dr. M, but the intention is the same. 
Not long ago I had the same dream in a somewhat modified form. On this occasion I felt 
thirsty before going to bed, and emptied the glass of water which stood on the little 
chest beside my bed. Some hours later, during the night, my thirst returned, with the 
consequent discomfort. In order to obtain water, I should have had to get up and fetch 
the glass which stood on my wife's beddable. I thus quite appropriately dreamt that my 
wife was giving me a drink from a vase; this vase was an Etruscan cinerary urn, which I 
had brought home from Italy and had since given away. But the water in it tasted so salt 
(apparently on account of the ashes) that I was forced to wake. It may be observed how 
conveniently the dream is capable of arranging matters. Since the fulfilment of a wish is 
its only purpose, it may be perfectly egoistic. Love of comfort is really not compatible 
with consideration for others. The introduction of the cinerary urn is probably once 
again the fulfilment of a wish; I regret that I no longer possess this vase; it, like the 
glass of water at my wife's side, is inaccessible to me. The cinerary urn is appropriate 
also in connection with the sensation of an increasingly salty taste, which I know will 
compel me to wake.¹
Such convenience-dreams came very frequently to me in my youth. Accustomed as I had 
always been to working until late at night, early waking was always a matter of 
difficulty. I used then to dream that I was out of bed and standing at the wash-stand. 
After a while I could no longer shut out the knowledge that I was not yet up; but in the 
meantime I had continued to sleep. The same sort of lethargy-
¹The facts relating to dreams of thirst were known also to Weygandt, who speaks, of them 
as follows; "It is just this sensation of thirst which is registered most accurately: of 
all; it always causes a representation of quenching the thirst. The manner in which the 
dream represents the act of quenching the thirst is manifold, and is specified in 
accordance with some recent recollection. A universal phenomenon noticeable here is the; 
fact that the representation of quenching the thirst is immediately followed by 
disappointment in the inefficacy of the imagined refreshment." But he overlooks the 
universal character of the reaction of the dream to the stimulus. If other persons who 
are troubled by thirst at night awake without dreaming beforehand, this does not 
constitute an; objection to my experiment, but characterizes them as persons who sleep 
less soundly. Cf. Isaiah, 29. 8.
dream was dreamed by a young colleague of mine, who appears to share my propensity for 
sleep. With him it assumed a particularly amusing form. The landlady with whom he was 
lodging in the neighbourhood of the hospital had strict orders to wake him every morning 
at a given hour, but she found it by no means easy to carry out his orders. One morning 
sleep was especially sweet to him. The woman called into his room: "Herr Pepi, get up; 
you've got to go to the hospital." Whereupon the sleeper dreamt of a room in the 
hospital, of a bed in which he was lying, and of a chart pinned over his head, which read 
as follows: "Pepi M, medical, student, 22 years of age." He told himself in the dream: 
"If I am already at the hospital, I don't have to go there," turned over, and slept on. 
He had thus frankly ad mitted to himself his motive for dreaming.
Here is yet another dream of which the stimulus was active during sleep: One of my women 
patients, who had been obliged to undergo an unsuccessful operation on the jaw, was 
instructed by her physicians to wear by day and night a cooling apparatus on the affected 
cheek; but she was in the habit of throwing it off as soon as she had fallen asleep. One 
day I was asked to reprove her for doing so; she had again thrown the apparatus on the 
floor. The patient defended herself as follows: "This time I really couldn't help it; it 
was the result of a dream which I had during the night. In the dream I was in a box at 
the opera, and was taking a lively interest in the performance. But Herr Karl Meyer was 
lying in the sanatorium and complaining pitifully on account of pains in his jaw. I said 
to myself, 'Since I haven't the pains, I don't need the apparatus either'; that's why I 
threw it away." The dream of this poor sufferer reminds me of an expression which comes 
to our lips when we are in a disagreeable situation: "Well, I can imagine more amusing 
things!" The dream presents these "more amusing things!" Herr Karl Meyer, to whom the 
dreamer attributed her pains, was the most casual acquaintance of  whom she could think.
It is quite as simple a matter to discover the wish-fulfilment in several other dreams 
which I have collected from healthy persons. A friend who was acquainted with my theory 
of dreams, and had explained it to his wife, said to me one day: "My wife asked me to 
tell you that she dreamt yesterday that she was having her menses. You will know what 
that means." Of course I know: if the young wife dreams that she is having her menses, 
the menses have stopped. I can well imagine that she would have liked to enjoy her 
freedom a little longer, before the discomforts of maternity began. It was a clever way 
of giving notice of her first pregnancy. Another friend writes that his wife had dreamt 
not long ago that she noticed milk-stains on the front of her blouse. This also is an 
indication of pregnancy, but not of the first one; the young mother hoped she would have 
more nourishment for the second child than she had for the first.
A young woman who for weeks had been cut off from all society because she was nursing a 
child who was suffering from an infectious dis ease dreamt, after the child had 
recovered, of a company of people in which Alphonse Daudet, Paul Bourget, Marcel Prevost 
and others were present; they were all very pleasant to her and amused her enormously. In 
her dream these different authors had the features which their portraits give them. M. 
Prevost, with whose portrait she is not familiar, looked like the man who had disinfected 
the sickroom the day before, the first outsider to enter it for a long time. Obviously 
the dream is to be translated thus: "It is about time now for something more entertaining 
than this eternal nursing."
Perhaps this collection will suffice to prove that frequently, and under the most complex 
conditions, dreams may be noted which can be understood only as wish-fulfilments, and 
which present their content without concealment. In most cases these are short and simple 
dreams, and they stand in pleasant contrast to the con fused and overloaded 
dream-compositions which have almost exclusively attracted the attention of the writers 
on the subject. But it will repay us if we give some time to the examination of these 
simple dreams. The simplest dreams of all are, I suppose, to be expected in the case of 
children whose psychic activities are certainly less complicated than those of adults. 
Child psychology, in my opinion, is destined to render the same services to the 
psychology of adults as a study of the structure or development of the lower animals 
renders to the investigation of the structure of the higher orders of animals. Hitherto 
but few de liberate efforts have been made to make use of the psychology of the child for 
such a purpose.
The dreams of little children are often simple fulfilments of wishes, and for this reason 
are, as compared with the dreams of adults; by no means interesting. They present no 
problem to be solved, but they are invaluable as affording proof that the dream, in its 
inmost essence, is the fulfilment of a wish. I have been able to collect several examples 
of such dreams from the material furnished by my own children.
For two dreams, one that of a daughter of mine, at that time eight and a half years of 
age, and the other that of a boy of five and a quarter, I am indebted to an excursion to 
Hallstatt, in the summer of 1896. I must first explain that we were living that summer on 
a hill near Aussee, from which, when the weather was fine, we enjoyed a splendid view of 
the Dachstein. With a telescope we could easily distinguish the Simony hut. The children 
often tried to see it through the telescope— I do not know with what success. Before 
the excursion I had told the children that Hallstatt lay at the foot of the Dachstein. 
They looked forward to the outing with the greatest delight. From Hallstatt we entered 
the valley of Eschern, which enchanted the children with its constantly changing scenery. 
One of them, how ever, the boy of five, gradually became discontented. As often as a 
mountain came into view, he would ask: "Is that the Dachstein?" where upon I had to 
reply: "No, only a foot-hill." After this question had been repeated several times he 
fell quite silent, and did not wish to accompany us up ~the steps leading to. 
the-waterfall. I thought he was tired. But the next morning he came to me, perfectly 
happy, and said: "Last night I dreamt that we went to the Simony hut." I. understood him 
now; he had expected, when I spoke of the Dachstein, that on our excursion to Hallstatt 
he would climb the mountain, and would see at close quarters the hut which had been so 
often mentioned when the telescope was used. When he learned that he was expected to 
content himself with foot-hills and a waterfall he was disappointed, and became 
discontented. But the dream compensated him for all this. I tried to learn some details 
of the dream; they were scanty. "You go up steps for six hours" as he had been told.
On this excursion the girl of eight and a half had likewise cherished wishes which had to 
be satisfied by a dream. We had taken with us to Hallstatt our neighbour's 
twelve-year-old boy; quite a polished little gentleman, who, it seemed to me, had already 
won the little woman's sympathies. Next morning she related the following dream: "Just 
think, I dreamt that Emil was one of the family, that he said 'papa' and 'mamma' to you, 
and slept at our house, in the big room, like one of the boys. Then mamma came into the 
room arid threw a handful of big bars of chocolate, wrapped in blue and green paper, 
under our beds." The girl's brothers, who evidently had not inherited an understanding of 
dream-interpretation, declared, just as the writers we have quoted would have done: "That 
dream is nonsense." The girl de fended at least one part of the dream, and from the 
standpoint of the theory of the neuroses it is interesting to learn which part it was 
that she defended: "That Emil was one of the family was nonsense, but that about the bars 
of chocolate wasn't." It was just this latter part that was obscure to me, until my wife 
furnished the explanation. On the way home from the railway-station the. children had 
stopped in front of a slot-machine, and had wanted exactly such bars of chocolate, 
wrapped in paper with a metallic lustre, such as the machine, in their experience, 
provided. But the mother thought^ and rightly so, that the day had brought them enough 
wish-fulfilments, and therefore left this wish to be satisfied in the dream. This little 
scene had escaped me. That portion of the dream which had been condemned by my daughter I 
understood without any difficulty. I myself had heard the well-behaved little guest 
enjoining the children, as they were walking ahead of us, to wait until "papa" or "mamma" 
had come up. For the little girl the dream turned this temporary relationship into a 
permanent adoption, Her affection could not as yet-conceive of any other way of enjoying 
her friend's company permanently than the adoption pictured in her dream, which was 
suggested by her brothers. Why the bars of chocolate were thrown under the bed could not, 
of course, be explained without questioning the child.
From a friend I have learned of a dream very much like that of my little boy. It was 
dreamed by a little girl of eight. Her father, accompanied by several children, had 
started on a walk to Dornbach, with the intention of visiting the Rohrer hut, but had 
turned back, as it was growing late, promising the children to take them some other 
time.; On the: way back: they passed, a signpost which pointed to the Hameau. The 
children now asked him to take them to the Hameau, but once more, and for the same 
reason, they had to be content with the promise that they should go there some other day. 
Next morning the little girl went to her father and told him, with a satisfied air: 
"Papa, I dreamed last night that yon were with us at the Rohrer hut, and on, the: 
Hameau.”
Thus, in the dream her impatience had anticipated the fulfilment of the promise made by 
her father.
Another dream, with which the picturesque beauty of the Aussee inspired my daughter, at 
that time three and a quarter years of age, is equally straightforward. The little girl 
had crossed the lake for the first time, and the trip had passed too quickly for her. She 
did not want to leave the boat at the landing, and cried bitterly. The next morning she 
told us: "Last night I was sailing on the lake." Let us hope that the duration of this 
dream-voyage was more satisfactory to her.
My eldest boy, at that time eight years of age, was already dreaming of the realization 
of his fancies. He had ridden in a chariot with Achilles, with Diomedes as charioteer. On 
the previous day he had shown a lively interest in a book on the myths of Greece which 
had been given to his elder sister.
If it can be admitted that the talking of children in their sleep belongs to the sphere 
of dreams, I can relate the following as one of the earliest dreams in my collection: My 
youngest daughter, at: that time nineteen months old, vomited one morning, arid was 
therefore kept without food all day. During the night she was heard to call excitedly in 
her sleep: "Anna F(r)eud, Si'awbewy, wild st'awbewy, om'lette pap!” She used her name 
in this way in order to express the act of appropriation; the menu presumably included 
everything that would seem to her a desirable meal; the fact, that two (Varieties of 
strawberry appeared in it was a demonstration against the sanitary regulations of the 
household, and was based on the circumstance, which she had by no means over looked, that 
the nurse had- ascribed her indisposition to an over-plentiful consumption of 
strawberries; so in her dream she avenged herself for this opinion which met with her 
disapproval.¹
When we call childhood happy because it does not yet know sexual desire, we must not 
forget what a fruitful source of disappointment and renunciation, and therefore of 
dream-stimulation, the other great vital impulse may be
¹The dream afterwards accomplished the same purpose in the case of the child's 
grandmother, who is older than the child by about seventy years. After, she had been 
forced to go hungry for a day on account of the restlessness of-her floating kidney, she 
dreamed, being apparently translated into the happy years of her girlhood, that she had. 
been asked out, invited to lunch and dinner; and had at each meal been served with the 
most delicious titbits.
for the child.¹ Here is a second example; My nephew, twenty-two months of age, had been 
instructed to congratulate me on my birthday, and to give me a present of a small basket 
of cherries, which at that time of the year were scarce, being hardly in season. He 
seemed to find the task a difficult one, for he repeated again and again: "Cherries in 
it," and could not be induced to let the little basket go out of his hands. But he knew 
how to indemnify himself. He had, until then, been in the habit of telling his mother 
every morning that he had dreamt of the "white soldier," an officer of the guard in a 
white cloak, whom he had once admired in the street. On the day after the sacrifice on my 
birthday he woke up joy fully with the announcement, which could have referred only to a 
dream: "He [r] man eaten all the cherries!"²
What animals dream of I do not know. A proverb, for which I am indebted to one of my 
pupils, professes to tell us, for it asks the question: "What does the goose dream of?" 
and answers: "Of maize."³ The whole theory that the dream is the fulfilment of a wish is 
contained in these two sentences.⁴
We now perceive that we should have reached our theory of the hidden meaning of dreams by 
the shortest route had. we merely consulted the vernacular. Proverbial wisdom, it is 
true, often speaks contemptuously enough of dreams—it- apparently seeks to justify the 
scientists when it says that "dreams are bubbles"; but in colloquial language the dream 
is predominantly the gracious fulfiller of wishes. "I should never have imagined that in 
my wildest dreams," we exclaim in delight if we find that the reality surpasses our 
expectations.
IV. Distortion in Dreams
If I now declare that wish-fulfilment is the meaning of every dream, so that there cannot
¹A more searching investigation into the phychic life of the child teaches us, of 
course, that sexual motives, in infantile forms, play a very considerable part, which has 
been too long overlooked, in the psychic, activity of the child. This permits us to doubt 
to some extent the happiness of the child, as imagined later by adults. Cf. Three 
Contributions to the Theory of Sex.
²It should be mentioned that young children often have more complex and obscure dreams, 
while, on the other hand, adults, in certain circumstances, often have dreams of a simple 
and infantile character. How rich in unsuspected content the dreams of children no more 
than four or five years of age may be is shown by the examples in my "Analysis of a 
Phobia in a five-year old Boy," Collected Papers, III, and Jung's "Experiences Concerning 
the Psychic Life of the; Child," translated by Brill, American Journal of Psychology. 
April, 1910. For analytically interpreted dreams of children, see also yon Hug-Hellmuth, 
Putnam, Raalte, Spielrein, and Tausk; others by Banchieri, Busemann, Doglia, and 
especially Wigam, who emphasizes the wish-fulfilling tendency of such dreams. On the 
other hand, it seems that dreams of an infantile type reappear with especial frequency in 
adults who are transferred into the midst of unfamiliar conditions. Thus Otto 
Nordenskjold, in his book, Antarctic (1904, vol. i, p. 336), writes as follows of the 
crew who spent the winter with him: "Very characteristic of the trend of our inmost 
thoughts were our dreams, which were never more vivid and more numerous. Even those of 
our comrades with whom dreaming was formerly exceptional had long stories to tell in the 
morning when we exchanged our experiences in the world of phantasy. They all had 
reference to that outside world which was now so; far removed from us, but they often 
fitted into our immediate, circumstances. An especially characteristic dream was that in 
which one of our comrades believed himself back at school, where the task was assigned to 
him of skinning miniature seals, which were manufactured especially for purposes of 
instruction. Eating and drinking constituted the pivot around which most of our dreams 
revolved. One of us, who was especially fond of going to big dinner-parties, was 
delighted if he could report in the morning 'that he had had a three-course dinner.' 
Another dreamed of tobacco, whole mountains of tobacco; yet another dreamed of a ship 
approaching on the open sea under full sail. Still another dream deserves to be 
mentioned: The postman brought the post and gave a long explanation of why it was so long 
delayed; he had de livered it at the wrong address, and only with great trouble was he 
able to get it back. To be sure, we were often occupied in our sleep with still more 
impossible things, but the lack of phantasy in almost all the dreams which I myself 
dreamed, or heard others relate, was quite striking. It would certainly have been of 
great psychological interest if all these dreams could have been recorded. But one can 
readily understand how we longed for sleep. That alone, could afford us everything that 
we all most ardently desired." I will continue by a quotation from Du Prel (p. 231): 
"Mungo Park, nearly dying of thirst on one of his African expeditions, dreamed constantly 
of the well-watered valleys and meadows of his home. Similarly Trenck, tortured by hunger 
in the fortress of Magdeburg, saw himself surrounded by copious meals. And George Back, a 
member of Franklin's first expedition, when he was on the point of death by starvation, 
dreamed continually and invariably of plenteous meals."
³A Hungarian proverb cited by Ferenczi states more explicitly that "the pig dreams of 
acorns, the goose of maize." A Jewish proverb asks: "Of what does the hen dream?"—"Of 
millet" (Sammlung jud. Sprichw. u. Redensarien., edit, by Bernstein; 2nd ed:, p. 116).
⁴I am far from wishing to assert that no previous writer has ever thought of tracing a 
dream to a wish. (Cf. the first passages of the next chapter.) Those interested in the 
subject will find that even in antiquity the physician Herophilos, who lived under the 
First Ptolemy, distinguished between three kinds of dreams: dreams sent by the gods; 
natural dreams—those which come about whenever the soul creates for itself an image of 
that which is beneficial to it, and will come to pass; and mixed dreams — those which 
originate spontaneously from the juxtaposition of images, when we see that which we 
desire. From the examples collected by Schemer, J. Starcke cites a dream which was 
described by the author himself as a wish-fulfilment (p. 239). Schemer says: "The 
phantasy immediately fulfills the dreamer's wish, simply because this existed vividly in 
the mind." This dream belongs to the "emotional dreams." Akin to it are dreams due to 
"masculine and feminine erotic longing," and to "irritable moods." As will readily be 
seen, Schemer does not ascribe to the wish any further significance for the dream than to 
any other psychic condition of the waking state; least of all does he insist on the 
connection between the wish and the essential nature of the dream.
be any dreams other than wish-dreams, I know beforehand that I shall meet with the most 
emphatic contradiction. My critics will object: "The fact that there are dreams which are 
to be understood as fulfilments of wishes is not new, but has long since been recognized 
by such writers as Radestock, Volkelt, Purkinje, Griesinger and others.¹ That there can 
be no other dreams than those of wish-fulfilments is yet one more unjustified 
generalization, which, fortunately, can be easily refuted. Dreams which present the most 
painful content, and not the least trace of; wish-fulfilment, occur frequently enough. 
The pessimistic philosopher, Eduard von Hartmann, is perhaps most completely opposed to 
the theory of wish-fulfilment. In his Philosophy of the Unconscious, Part II (Stereotyped 
German edition, p. 344), he says: 'As regards the dream, with it all the troubles of 
waking life pass over into the sleeping state; all save the one thing which may in some 
degree reconcile the cultured person with life—scientific and artistic enjoyment. . . 
.' But even less pessimistic observers have emphasized the fact that in our dreams pain 
and disgust are more frequent than pleasure (Scholz, p. 33; Volkelt, p. 80, et al.). Two
ladies, Sarah Weed and Florence Hallam, have even worked out, on the basis of their 
dreams, a numerical value for the preponderance: of distress and discomfort in dreams. 
They find that 58 per cent of dreams are disagreeable, and only 28.6 positively pleasant. 
Besides those dreams that convey into our sleep the many painful emotions of life, there 
are also anxiety-dreams, in which this most terrible of all the painful emotions torments 
us until we wake. Now it is precisely by these anxiety dreams that children are so often 
haunted (cf. Debacker on Pavor nocturnus); and yet it was in children that you found the 
wish-fulfilment dream in its most obvious form."
The anxiety-dream does really seem to preclude a generalization of the thesis deduced 
from the examples given in the last chapter, that dreams are wish-fulfilments, and even 
to condemn it as an absurdity.
Nevertheless, it is not difficult to parry these apparently invincible objections. It is 
merely necessary to observe that our doctrine is not based upon the estimates of the 
obvious dream content, but relates to the thought-content, which, in the course of 
interpretation, is found
¹Already Plotinus, the neo-Platonist, said: "When desire bestirs itself, then comes 
phantasy, and presents to us, as it were, the object of desire" (Du Prel, p. 276).
to lie behind the dream. Let us compare and contrast the manifest and the latent dream 
content. It is true that there are dreams the manifest content of which is of the most 
painful nature. But has anyone ever tried to interpret these dreams—to discover their 
latent thought-content? If not, the two objections to our doctrine are no longer valid; 
for there is always the possibility that even our painful and terrifying dreams may, upon 
interpretation, prove to be wish fulfilments.²
In scientific research it is often advantageous if the solution of one problem presents 
difficulties, to add to it a second problem; just as it is easier to crack two nuts 
together instead of separately. Thus, we are confronted not only with the problem: How 
can painful and terrifying dreams be the fulfilments of wishes? but we may add to this a 
second problem which arises from the foregoing discussion of the general problem of the 
dream: Why do not the dreams that show an indifferent content, and yet turn out to be 
wish fulfilments, reveal their meaning without disguise? Take the exhaustively treated 
dream of Irma's injection: it is by no means of a painful character, and it may be 
recognized, upon interpretation, as a striking wish-fulfilment. But why is an 
interpretation necessary at all? Why does not the dream say directly what it means? As a 
matter of fact, the dream of Irma's injection does not at first produce the impression 
that it represents a wish of the dreamer's as fulfilled; The reader will not have 
received this impression, and even I myself was not aware of the fact until I had 
undertaken the analysis. If we call this peculiarity of dreams—namely, that they need 
elucidation— the phenomenon of distortion in dreams, a second question then arises: 
What is the origin of this distortion in dreams?
If one's first thoughts on this subject were
²It is quite incredible with what obstinacy readers and critics have excluded this 
consideration and dis regarded the fundamental differentiation between the manifest and 
the latent dream-content. Nothing in the literature of the subject approaches so closely 
to my own conception of dreams as a passage in J. Sully's essay, Dreams as a Revelation 
(and it is not because I do not think it valuable that I allude to it here for the first 
time): "It would seem then, after all, that dreams are not the utter nonsense they have 
been said to be by such authorities as Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Milton. The chaotic 
aggregations of our night-fancy have a significance and communicate new knowledge. Like 
some letter in cipher, the dream-inscription when scrutinized closely loses its first 
look of balderdash and takes on the aspect of a serious, intelligible message. Or, to 
vary the figure slightly, we may say that, like some palimpsest, the dream discloses 
beneath its worth less surface-characters traces of an old and precious communication" 
(p. 364).
consulted, several possible solutions might suggest themselves: for example, that during 
sleep one is incapable of finding an adequate expression for one's dream-thoughts. The 
analysis of certain dreams, however, compels us to offer another explanation. I shall 
demonstrate this by means of a second dream of my own, which again involves numerous 
indiscretions, but which compensates for this personal sacrifice by affording a thorough 
elucidation of the problem.
Preliminary Statement
In the spring of 1897 I learnt that two professors of our university had proposed me for 
the title of Professor Extraordinarius (assistant professor). The news came as a surprise 
to me, and pleased me considerably as an expression of appreciation on the part of two 
eminent men which could not be explained by personal interest. But I told myself 
immediately that I must not expect anything to come of their proposal. For some years 
past the Ministry had disregarded such proposals, and several col leagues of mine, who 
were my seniors and at least my equals in desert, had been waiting in vain all this time 
for the appointment. I had no reason to suppose that I should fare any better. I 
resolved, therefore, to resign myself to disappointment. I am not, so far as I know, 
ambitious, and I was following my profession with gratifying success even without the 
recommendation of a professorial title. Whether I considered the grapes to be sweet or 
sour did not matter, since they undoubtedly hung too high for me.
One evening a friend of mine called to see me; one of those colleagues whose fate I had 
regarded as a warning. As he had long been a candidate for promotion to the professorate 
(which in our society makes the doctor a demigod to his patients), and as he was less 
resigned than I, he was accustomed from time to time to remind the authorities of his 
claims in the hope of advancing his interests. It was after one of these visits that he 
called on me. He said that this time he had driven the exalted gentleman into a corner, 
and had asked him frankly whether considerations of religious denomination were not 
really responsible for the postponement of his appointment. The answer was: His 
Excellency had to admit that in the present state of public opinion he was not in a 
position, etc. "Now at least I know where I stand," my friend concluded his narrative, 
which told me nothing new, but which was calculated to confirm me in my resignation. For 
the same denominational considerations would apply to my own case.
On the morning after my friend's visit I had the following dream, which was notable also 
on account of its form. It consisted of two thoughts and two images, so that a thought 
and an image emerged alternately. But here I shall record only the first half of the 
dream, since the second half has no relation to the purpose for which I cite the dream.
I. My friend R is my uncle—I have a great affection for him.
II. I see before me his face, somewhat altered. It seems to be elongated; a yellow beard, 
which surrounds it, is seen with peculiar distinctness.
Then follow the other two portions of the dream, again a thought and an image, which I 
omit.
The interpretation of this dream was arrived at in the following manner:
When I recollected the dream in the course of the morning, I laughed outright and said, 
"The dream is nonsense." But I could not get it out of my mind, and I was pursued by it 
all day, until at last, in the evening, I reproached myself in these words: "If in the 
course of a dream-interpretation one of your patients could find nothing better to say 
than 'That is nonsense,' you would reprove him, and you would suspect that behind the 
dream there was hidden some disagreeable affair, the exposure of which he wanted to spare 
himself. Apply the same thing to your own case; your opinion that the dream is nonsense 
probably signifies merely an inner resistance to its interpretation. Don't let yourself 
be put off." I then proceeded with the interpretation.
R is my uncle. What can that mean? I had only one uncle, my uncle Joseph.¹ His story, to 
be sure, was a sad one. Once, more than thirty years ago, hoping to make money, he 
allowed himself to be involved in transactions of a kind which the law punishes severely, 
and paid the penalty. My father, whose hair turned grey with grief within a few days, 
used always to say that uncle Joseph had never been a bad man, but, after all, he was a 
simpleton. If, then, my friend R is my uncle Joseph, that is
¹It is astonishing to see how my memory here restricts itself—in the waking 
stateI—for the purposes of analysis. I have known five of my uncles and I loved and 
honoured one of them. But at the moment when I overcame my resistance to the 
interpretation of the dream, I said to myself: "I have only one uncle, the one who is 
intended in the dream."
equivalent to saying: "Ris a simpleton." Hardly credible, and very disagreeable! But 
there is the face that I saw in the dream, with its elongated features and its yellow 
beard. My uncle actually had such a face—long, and framed in a handsome yellow beard. 
My friend R was extremely swarthy, but when black-haired people begin to grow grey they 
pay for the glory of their youth. Their black beards undergo an unpleasant change of 
colour, hair by hair; first they turn a reddish brown, then a yellowish brown, and then 
definitely grey. My friend R's beard is now in this stage; so, for that matter, is my 
own, a fact which I note with regret. The face that I see in my dream is at once that of 
my friend R and that of my uncle. It is like one of those composite photographs of 
Galton's; in order to emphasize family resemblances Galton had several faces photographed 
on the same plate. No doubt is now possible; it is really my opinion that my friend R is 
a simpleton—like my uncle Joseph. 
I have still no idea for what purpose I have worked out this relationship. It is 
certainly one to which I must unreservedly object. Yet it is not very profound, for my 
uncle was a criminal, and my friend R is not, except in so far as he was once fined for 
knocking down an ap prentice with his bicycle. Can I be thinking of this offence? That 
would make the comparison ridiculous. Here I recollect another conversation, which I had 
some days ago with another colleague, N; as a matter of fact, on the same subject. I met 
N in the street; he, too, has been nominated for a professorship, and having heard that I 
had been similarly honoured he congratulated me. I refused his congratulations, saying; 
"You are the last man to jest about the matter, for you know from your own experience 
what the nomination is worth." Thereupon he said, though probably not in earnest: "You 
can't be sure of that. There is a special objection in my case. Don't you know that a 
woman once brought a criminal accusation against me? I need hardly assure you that the 
matter was put right. It was a mean attempt at blackmail, and it was all I could do to 
save the plaintiff from punishment. But it may be that the affair is remembered against 
me at the Ministry. You, on the other hand, are above reproach." Here, then, I have the 
criminal, and at the same time the interpretation and tendency of my dream. My uncle 
Joseph represents both of my colleagues who have not been appointed to the 
professorship-the one as a simpleton, the other as a criminal.
Now, too, I know for what purpose I need this representation. If denominational 
considerations are a determining factor in the postponement of my two friends' 
appointment, then my own appointment is likewise in jeopardy. But if I can refer the 
rejection of my two friends to other causes, which do not apply to my own case, my. hopes 
are unaffected. This is the procedure followed by my dream: it makes the one friend R; a 
simpleton, and the other, N, a criminal. But since I am neither one nor the other, there 
is nothing in common between us. I have a right to enjoy my appointment to the title of 
professor, and have avoided the distressing application to my own case of the information 
which the official gave to my friend R.
I must pursue the interpretation of this dream still farther; for I have a feeling that 
it is not yet satisfactorily elucidated. I still feel disquieted by the ease with which I 
have degraded two respected colleagues in order to clear my own way to the professorship. 
My dissatisfaction with this procedure has, of course, been mitigated since I have 
learned to estimate the testimony of dreams at its true value. I should contradict anyone 
who suggested that I really considered R a simpleton, or that I did not believe N's 
account of the blackmailing incident. And of course I do not believe that Irma has been 
made seriously ill by an injection of a preparation of propyl administered by Otto. Here, 
as before, what the dream expresses is only my wish that things might be so. The 
statement in which my wish is realized sounds less absurd in the second dream than in the 
first; it is here made with a skilful use of actual points of support in establishing 
something like a plausible slander, one of which one could say that "there is some thing 
in it." For at that time my friend R had to contend with the adverse vote of a university 
professor of his own department, and my friend N had himself, all unsuspectingly, 
provided me with material for the calumny. Nevertheless, I repeat, it still seems to me 
that the dream requires further elucidation. 
I remember now that the dream contained yet another portion which has hitherto been 
ignored by the interpretation. After it occurred to me that my friend R was my uncle, I 
felt in the dream a great affection for him. To whom is this feeling directed? For my 
uncle Joseph, of course, I have never had any feelings of affection. R has for many years 
been a dearly loved friend, but if I were to go to him and express my affection for him 
in terms approaching the degree of-affection which I; felt in the dream, he would 
undoubtedly be surprised: My affection, if it was for him, seems/false and exaggerated, 
as does my judgment of his intellectual qualities, which I expressed by merging his 
personality in that of my. uncle^ but exaggerated in the opposite direction. Now, 
however, a new state of  affairs dawns> upon ,me. The affection in the dream does not 
belong to the latent content;: to the thoughts behind the dream; it stands in opposition 
to this content; it is calculated to conceal the. knowledge conveyed by the 
interpretation. Probably this is precisely its function. I remember with what reluctance 
I undertook the interpretation, how long I tried to postpone it, and how I: declared the 
dream to be sheer nonsense. I know from my psycho-analytic practice how such a 
condemnation is to be interpreted. It has no informative value, but merely, expresses an 
affect. If my little daughter does not like an apple which is offered her, she asserts 
that the apple is bitter, without even tasting it. If my patients behave thus, I know 
that we are dealing with an idea which they are trying to repress. The same thing applies 
to my dream. I do not want to interpret it because there is something in the 
interpretation to which I object. After the interpretation of the dream is completed, I 
discover what it was to which I objected; it was the assertion that R is a simpleton. I 
can refer the affection which I feel for R not to the latent dream-thoughts, but rather 
to this unwilling ness of mine. If my dream, as compared with its latent content, is 
disguised at this point, and actually misrepresents things by producing their opposites, 
then the manifest affection in the dream serves the purpose of the misrepresentation; in 
other words, the distortion is here shown to be intentional—it is a means of disguise. 
My dream-thoughts of R are derogatory, and so that I may not become aware of this the 
very opposite of defamation—a tender affection for him—enters into the dream.
This discovery may prove to be generally valid. As' the examples in Chapter III have 
demonstrated, there are, of course, dreams which are undisguised wish-fulfilments. 
Wherever a wish-fulfilment is unrecognizable and disguised there must be-present a 
tendency to defend oneself against this wish, and in consequence of this defence the wish 
is unable to express itself save in a distorted form. I will try to find a parallel in 
social life to this occurrence in the inner psychic life. Where in social life can a 
similar misrepresentation be found? Only where two persons are concerned, one of whom 
possesses a certain power while the other has to act with a certain consideration on 
account of this power. The second person will then distort his psychic-actions; or, as we 
say, he will mask himself. The politeness which I practise every day is largely a 
disguise of this kind; if I interpret my dreams lor the benefit of my readers, I am 
forced to make misrepresentations of 'this kind. The poet even complains of the necessity 
of such misrepresentation: Das Beste, was du wissen kannst, darfst du den Buben dock 
nicht sagen: "The best that thou canst know thou mayst not tell to boys."
The political writer who has unpleasant truths to tell to those in power finds himself in 
a like position. If he tells everything without reserve, the Government will suppress 
them— retrospectively in the case of a verbal expression of opinion, preventively if 
they are to be published: in the Press. The writer stands in fear of the censorship; he 
therefore moderates and disguises the expression of his opinions. He finds himself 
compelled, in accordance-with the sensibilities of the censor, either to refrain 
altogether from certain forms of attack, or to express himself in allusions instead of by 
direct assertions; nr he must conceal his objectionable statement in an apparently 
innocent disguise. He may; for instance, tell of a contretemps between two Chinese 
mandarins, while he really has in mind the officials of his own country. The stricter the 
domination of the. censorship, the more thorough becomes the disguise, and, often enough, 
the more ingenious the means employed to put the reader on the track of the actual 
meaning.
The detailed correspondence between the phenomena of censorship and the phenomena of 
dream-distortion justifies us in presupposing similar conditions for both. We should then 
assume that in every human being there exist, as the primary cause of dream-formation, 
two psychic forces (tendencies or systems), one of which forms the wish expressed by the 
dream, while the other exercises a censorship over this dream-wish, thereby, enforcing on 
it a distortion. The question is: What is the nature of the authority of this Second 
agency by virtue of which it is able to exercise its censorship? If we remember that the 
latent dream-thoughts are not conscious before analysis, but that the manifest 
dream-content emerging from them is consciously remembered, it is not a far- fetched 
assumption that admittance to the consciousness is the prerogative of the second agency. 
Nothing can reach the consciousness from the first system which has not previously passed 
the second instance; and the second in stance lets nothing pass without exercising its 
rights, and forcing such modifications as are pleasing to itself upon the candidates for 
ad mission to consciousness. Here we arrive; at a very definite conception of the essence 
of consciousness; for us the state of becoming conscious is a special psychic act, 
different from and independent of the process of becoming fixed or represented, and 
consciousness appears to us as a sensory organ which perceives a content proceeding from 
another source. It may be shown that psycho-pathology simply cannot dispense with these 
fundamental assumptions. But we shall reserve for another time a more exhaustive 
examination of the subject. 
If I bear in mind the notion of the two psychic instances and their relation to the 
consciousness, I find in the sphere of politics a perfectly appropriate analogy to the 
extraordinary affection which I feel for my friend R, who is so disparaged in the 
dream-interpretation. I refer to the political life of a State in which the ruler, 
jealous of his rights, and an active public opinion are in mutual conflict. The people, 
protesting against the actions of an unpopular official, demand his dismissal. The 
autocrat, on the other hand, in order to show his contempt for the popular will, may then 
deliberately confer upon the official some exceptional distinction which otherwise would 
not have been conferred. Similarly, my second instance, controlling the access to my 
consciousness, distinguishes my friend R with a rush of extraordinary affection, because 
the wish tendencies of the first system, in view of a particular interest on which they 
are just then intent, would like to disparage him as a simpleton.¹
¹Such hypocritical dreams are not rare; either with me or with others. While I have been 
working at a certain scientific problem, I have been visited for several nights, at quite 
short intervals, by a somewhat con fusing dream which has as its content a reconciliation 
with a friend dropped long ago. After three or four attempts I finally succeeded in 
grasping the meaning of this dream. It was in the nature of an encouragement to give up 
the remnant of consideration still surviving for the person in question, to make myself 
quite free from, him, but it hypocritically disguised itself in its antithesis. I have 
recorded a "hypocritical Oedipus dream" in which the hostile feelings and death-wishes of 
the dream-thoughts were replaced by manifest tenderness ('Typisckes Beispiel eines 
verkappten Oedipustraumes." Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, Vol. I, No. I-II [1910]). 
Another class of hypocritical dreams will be recorded in another place (see Chap, vi, 
"The Dream-Work").
We may now perhaps >begin to suspect that dream-interpretation is capable of yielding 
information concerning the structure of our psychic apparatus which we have hitherto 
vainly expected from philosophy. We shall not, however, follow up this trail, but shall 
return to our original problem as soon as we have elucidated the problem of 
dream-distortion. The question arose, how dreams with a disagreeable content can be 
analysed as wish-fulfillments. We see now that this is possible where a dream distortion 
has occurred, when the disagreeable content serves only to disguise the thing wished for. 
With regard to our assumptions respecting the two psychic instances, we can now also say 
that disagreeable dreams contain, as a matter of fact, something which is disagreeable to 
the second instance, but which at the same time fulfills a wish of the first instance. 
They are wish-dreams in so far as every dream emanates from the first instance, while the 
second instance behaves towards the dream only in a defensive, not in a constructive 
manner.² Were we to limit ourselves to a consideration of what the second instance 
contributes to the dream we should never understand the dream, and all the problems which 
the writers on the subject have discovered in the dream would have to remain unsolved.
That the dream actually has a secret meaning, which proves to be a wish-fulfillment, must 
be proved afresh in every case by analysis. I will therefore select a few dreams which 
have painful contents, and endeavour to analyse them. Some of them are dreams of 
hysterical subjects, which therefore call for a long preliminary statement, and in some 
passages an examination of the psychic processes occur ring in hysteria. This, though it 
will complicate the presentation, is unavoidable.
When I treat a psychoneurotic patient analytically, his dreams regularly, as I have said, 
become a theme of our conversations. I must therefore give him all the psychological 
explanations with whose aid I myself have succeeded in understanding his symptoms. And 
here I encounter unsparing criticism, which is perhaps no less shrewd than that which I 
have to expect from my colleagues. With perfect uniformity, my patients contradict the 
doctrine that dreams are the fulfillments of wishes. Here
²Later on we shall become, acquainted with cases in which, on the contrary, the dream 
expresses a wish of this second instance.
are several examples of the sort of dream-material which is adduced in refutation of my 
theory.
"You are always saying that a dream is a wish fulfilled," begins an intelligent lady 
patient. "Now I shall tell you a dream in which the content is quite the opposite, in 
which a wish of mine is not fulfilled. How do you reconcile that with your theory? The 
dream was as follows: I want to give a supper, but I have nothing available except some 
smoked salmon. I think I will go shopping, but I remember that it is Sunday afternoon, 
when all the shops are closed. I then try to ring up a few caterers, but the telephone is 
out of order. Accordingly I have to renounce my desire to give a supper."
I reply, of course, that only the analysis can decide the meaning of this dream, although 
I admit that at first sight it seems sensible and coherent and looks like the opposite of 
a wish fulfilment. "But what occurrence gave rise to this dream?" I ask. "You know that 
the stimulus of a dream always lies among the experiences of the preceding day."
Analysis
The patient's husband, an honest and capable meat salesman, had told her the day before 
that he was growing too fat, and that he meant to undergo treatment for obesity. He would 
rise early, take physical exercise, keep to a strict diet, and above all accept no more 
invitations to supper. She proceeds jestingly to relate how her husband, at a table 
d'hote, had made the acquaintance of an artist, who insisted upon painting his portrait, 
because he, the painter, had never seen such an expressive head. But her husband had 
answered in his downright fashion, that while he was much obliged, he would rather not be 
painted; and he was quite convinced that a bit of a pretty girl's posterior would please 
the artist better than his whole face.¹ She is very much in love with her husband, and 
teases him a good deal. She has asked him not to give her any caviar. What can that mean?
As a matter of fact, she had wanted for a long time to eat a caviar sandwich every 
morning, but had grudged the expense. Of course she could get the caviar from her husband 
at once if she asked for it. But she has, on the contrary, begged him not to give her any 
cav-
¹To sit for the painter. Goethe: And if he has.no backside, How can the nobleman sit?
iar, so that she might tease him about it a little longer.
(To me this explanation seems thin. Unconfessed motives are wont to conceal themselves 
behind just such unsatisfying explanations. We are reminded of the subjects hypnotised by 
Bernheim, who carried out a post-hypnotic order, and who, on being questioned as to their 
motives, instead of answering: "I do not know why I did that," had to invent a reason 
that was obviously inadequate. There is probably something similar to this in the case of 
my patient's caviar. I see that in waking life she is compelled to invent an unfulfilled 
wish. Her dream also shows her the non-fulfillment of her wish. But why does she need an 
unfulfilled wish?)
The ideas elicited so far are-insufficient for the interpretation of the dream. I press 
for more. After a short pause, which corresponds to the overcoming of a resistance, she 
reports that the day before she had paid a visit to a friend of whom she is really 
jealous because her husband is always praising this lady so highly. Fortunately this 
friend is very thin and lanky, and her husband likes full figures. Now of what did this 
thin friend speak? Of course, of her wish to become rather plumper. She also asked my 
patient: "When are you going to invite us again? You always have such good food."
Now the meaning of the dream is clear, I am able to tell the patient: "It is just as 
though you had thought at the moment of her asking you that: 'Of course, I'm to invite 
you so that you can eat at my bouse and get fat and become still more pleasing to my 
husband! I would rather give no more suppers! 'The dream then tells you that you cannot 
give a supper, thereby fulfilling your wish not to contribute anything to the rounding 
out of your friend's figure. Your husband's resolution to accept no more invitations to 
supper in order that he may grow thin teaches you that one grows fat on food eaten at 
other people's tables." Nothing is lacking now but some sort of coincidence which will 
confirm the, solution. The smoked salmon in the dream has not yet been traced.- "How did 
you come to think of salmon in your dream?"—"Smoked salmon is my friend's favourite 
dish," she replied. It happens that I know the lady, and am able to affirm that she 
grudges herself salmon just as my patient grudges herself caviar.
This dream admits of yet another and more exact interpretation—one which is actually 
necessitated only by a subsidiary circumstance.
The two interpretations do not contradict one another, but rather dovetail into one 
another, and furnish an excellent example of the usual ambiguity of dreams, as of all 
other psychopathological formations. We have heard that at the time of her dream of a 
denied wish the patient was impelled to deny herself a real wish (the wish to eat caviar 
sandwiches). Her friend, too, had expressed a wish, namely, to get fatter, and it would 
not surprise us if our patient had dreamt that this wish of her friend's-the wish to 
increase in weight—was not to be fulfilled; Instead of this, however, she dreamt that 
one of her own wishes was not fulfilled. The dream becomes capable of a new 
interpretation if in the dream she does not mean herself, but her friend, if she has put 
herself in the place of her friend, or, as we may say, has identified herself with her 
friend.
I think she has actually done this, and as a sign of this identification she has created 
for herself in real life an unfulfilled wish. But what is the meaning of this hysterical 
identification? To elucidate this a more exhaustive exposition is necessary. 
Identification is a highly important motive in the mechanism of hysterical symptoms; by 
this means patients are enabled to express in their symptoms not merely their own 
experiences, but the experiences of quite a number of other persons; they can suffer, as 
it were, for a whole mass of people, and fill all the parts of a drama with their own 
personalities. It will here be objected that this is the well-known hysterical imitation, 
the ability of hysterical subjects to imitate all the symptoms which impress them when 
they occur in others, as though pity were aroused to the point of reproduction. This, 
however, only indicates the path which the psychic process follows in hysterical 
imitation; But the path it self and the psychic act which follows this path are two 
different matters. The act itself is slightly more complicated than we are prone to 
believe the imitation of the hysterical to be; it corresponds to an unconscious 
end-process, as an example- will show. The physician who has, in the same ward with other 
patients, a female patient suffering from a particular kind of twitching, is not 
surprised if one morning he learns that this peculiar hysterical affection has found 
imitators. He merely tells himself: The others have seen her, and have imitated her; this 
is psychic infection. Yes, but psychic infection: occurs somewhat in the following 
manner: As a rule, patients know more about one another than the physician knows about 
any one of them, and they are concerned about one another when the doctor's visit is 
over. One of them has an attack to-day: at once it is known to the rest that a letter 
from home, a recrudescence of lovesickness, or the like, is the cause. Their sympathy is 
aroused, and although it does not emerge into consciousness they form the following 
conclusion: "If it is possible to suffer such an attack from such a cause, I too may 
suffer this sort of an attack, for I have the same occasion for it." If this were a 
conclusion capable of becoming conscious, it would perhaps express itself in dread of 
suffering a like attack; but it is formed in another psychic region, and consequently 
ends in the realization of the dreaded symptoms. Thus identification is not mere 
imitation, but an assimilation based upon the same aetiological claim; it expresses a 
just like, and refers to some common condition which has remained in the unconscious. 
In hysteria, identification is most frequently employed to express a sexual community. 
The hysterical woman identifies herself by her symptoms most readily—though not 
exclusively—with persons with whom she has had sexual relations, or who have had sexual 
intercourse with the same persons as herself. Language takes cognizance of this tendency: 
two lovers are said to be "one." In hysterical phantasy, as well as in dreams, 
identification may ensue if one simply thinks of sexual relations; they need not 
necessarily become actual. The patient is merely following the rules of the hysterical 
processes of thought when she expresses her jealousy of her friend (which, for that 
matter, she her self admits to be unjustified) by putting herself in her friend's place 
in her dream, and identifying herself with her by fabricating a symptom (the denied 
wish). One might further elucidate the process by saying: In the dream she puts herself 
in the place of her friend, because her friend has taken her own place in relation to her 
husband, and because she would like to take her friend's place in her husband's esteem.¹
The contradiction of my theory of dreams on the part of another female patient, the most 
intelligent of all my dreamers, was solved in a simpler fashion, though still in 
accordance with the principle that the non-fulfilment of one
¹I myself regret the inclusion of such passages from the psycho-pathology of hysteria, 
which, because of their fragmentary presentation, and because they are torn out of their 
context, cannot prove to be very illuminating. If these passages are capable of throwing 
any light upon the intimate5 relations' between dream and the psycho-neurosis, they have 
served the intention with which I have included them.
wish signified the fulfilment of another. I had one day explained to her that a dream is 
a wish fulfilment. On the following day she related a dream to the effect that she was 
travelling with her mother-in-law to the place in which they were both to spend the 
summer. Now I knew that she had violently protested against spending the summer in the 
neighbourhood of her mother-in-law, I also knew that she had fortunately been able to 
avoid doing so, since she had recently succeeded in renting a house in a place quite 
remote from that to which her mother-in-law was going. And now the dream reversed this 
desired solution. Was not this a flat contradiction of my theory of wish-fulfilment? One 
had only to draw the inferences from this dream in order to arrive at its interpretation. 
According to this dream, I was wrong; but it was her wish that I should be wrong, and 
this wish the dream showed her as fulfilled. But the wish that I should be wrong, which 
was fulfilled in the theme of the country house, referred in reality to another and more 
serious matter. At that time I had inferred, from the material furnished by her analysis, 
that something of significance in respect to her illness must have occurred at a certain 
time in her life. She had denied this, because it was not present in her memory. We soon 
came to see that I was right. Thus her wish that I should prove to be wrong, which was 
transformed into the dream that she was going into the country with her mother-in-law, 
corresponded with the justifiable wish that those things which were then only suspected 
had never occurred.
Without an analysis, and merely by means of an assumption, I took the liberty of 
interpreting a little incident in the life of a friend, who had been my companion through 
eight classes at school. He once heard a lecture of mine, delivered to a small audience, 
on the novel idea that dreams are wish-fulfilments. He went home, dreamt that he had lost 
all his lawsuits—he was a lawyer—and then complained to me about it. I took refuge in 
the evasion: "One can't win all one's cases"; but I thought to myself: "If, for eight 
years, I sat as primus on the first bench, while he moved up and down somewhere in the 
middle of the. class, may he not naturally have had the wish, ever since his boyhood, 
that I too might for once make a fool of myself?"
Yet another dream of a more gloomy character was offered me by a female patient in 
contradiction of my theory of the wish-dream. This patient, a young girl, began as 
follows:
"You remember that my sister has now only One boy, Charles. She lost the elder one, Otto, 
while I was still living with her. Otto was my favourite; it was I who really brought him 
up. I like the other little fellow, too, but, of course; not nearly as much as his dead 
brother. Now I dreamt last night that I Saw Charles lying dead before me. He was lying in 
his little coffin, his hands folded; there were candles all about; and, in short, it was 
just as it was at the time of little Otto's death, which gave me such a shock. Now tell 
me, what does this mean? You know me—am I really so bad as to wish that my sister 
should lose the only child she has left? Or does the dream mean that I wish that Charles 
had died rather than Otto, whom I liked so much better?" 
I assured her that this latter interpretation was impossible. After some reflection, I 
was able to give her the interpretation of the dream, which she subsequently confirmed. I 
was able to do so because the whole previous history of; the dreamer was known to me.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 178a- 179c
The dream-phantasy may, however, direct its attention not merely to the form of the 
exciting organ, but may even make the substance contained therein the object of 
symbolization. Thus, for example, the dream excited by the intestinal stimuli may lead us 
through muddy streets the dream due to stimuli from the bladder to foaming water. Or the 
stimulus as such, the nature of its excitation, and the object which it covets, are 
represented symbolically. Or, again, the dream-ego enters into a concrete association 
with the symbolization of its own state; as, for example, when in the case of painful 
stimuli we struggle desperately with vicious dogs or raging bulls, or when in a sexual 
dream the dreamer sees herself pursued by a naked man. Disregarding all the possible 
prolixity of elaboration, a phantastic symbolizing activity remains as the central force 
of every dream. Volkelt, in his fine and enthusiastic essay, attempted to penetrate still 
further into the character of this phantasy, and to assign to the psychic activity thus 
recognized its position in a system of philosophical ideas, which, however, remains... 
altogether^ too difficult of comprehension for anyone who is hot prepared by previous 
training for the intuitive comprehension of philosophical modes of-thought.
Schemer attributes no useful function to the activity of the symbolizing phantasy in 
dreams. In. dreams the psyche plays with the stimuli which are offered to it. One might 
conjecture that it plays in a mischievous fashion. And we might be asked whether our 
detailed consideration of Schemer's dream-theory, the arbitrariness, of which, and its 
deviation from the rules of all forms of research are only too obvious, can lead to any 
useful results. We might fitly reply that to reject Schemer's theory without previous 
examination would be imposing too arrogant a veto. This theory is based on the 
impressions produced by his dreams on a man who paid close attention to them, and who 
would appear to be personally very well equipped for tracing obscure psychic phenomena. 
Furthermore, it treats of a subject which (though rich in its contents and relations) has 
for thousands of years appeared mysterious to humanity, and to the elucidation of which 
science, strictly so called, has, as it confesses, contributed nothing beyond 
attempting—in uncompromising opposition to popular sentiment—to deny its content and 
significance. Finally, let us frankly admit that it seems as though we cannot very well 
avoid the phantastical in our attempts to explain dreams. We must remember also that 
there is such a thing as a phantasy of ganglion cells; the passage cited (p. 87) from a 
sober and exact investigator like Binz, which describes how the dawn of awakening floods 
the dormant cell-masses of the cerebral cortex, is not a whit less fanciful and 
improbable than Schemer's attempts at interpretation. I hope to be able to demonstrate 
that there is something real underlying these attempts, though the phenomena* which he de 
scribes have been only vaguely recognized, and do not possess the character of 
universality that should entitle them to be the basis of a theory of dreams. For the 
present, Schemer's theory of dreams, in contrast to the medical theory, may perhaps lead 
us to realize between what, extremes the explanation of dream-life is still unsteadily 
vacillating.
H. The Relation between Dreams and Mental Diseases
When we speak of the relation of dreams to mental derangement, we may mean three 
different things: (1) aetiological and clinical relations, as when a dream represents or 
initiates a psychotic condition, or occurs subsequently to such a condition;.(2) changes 
which the dreamlife undergoes in cases of mental disease; (3) inner relations between 
dreams and psychoses, analogies which point to an intimate relationship. These manifold 
relations between the two series of phenomena were in the early days of medical 
science—and are once more at the present time—a favourite theme of medical writers, 
as we may learn from the literature on the subject collated. by Spitta, Radestock, Maury, 
and Tissie. Recently Sante de Sanctis has directed his attention to this relationship.¹ 
For the purposes of our discussion it will suffice merely to glance at this important 
subject.
As to the clinical and aetiological relations between dreams and the psychoses, I will re 
port the following observations as examples: Hohnbaum asserts (see Krauss) that the first 
attack of insanity is frequently connected with a terrifying, anxiety-dream, and that the 
pre dominating idea is related to this dream. Sante de Sanctis adduces similar 
observations in respect of paranoiacs, and declares the dream to be, in some of them, "la 
vraie cause determinate de la folie."² The psychosis may come to life quite suddenly, 
simultaneously with the dream that contains its effective and delusive explanation, or it 
may develop slowly through subsequent dreams that have still to struggle against doubt. 
In one of de Sanctis's cases an intensively moving dream was accompanied by slight 
hysterical attacks, which, in their turn, were followed by an anxious melancholic state. 
Fere (cited by Tissie) refers to a dream which was followed by hysterical paralysis. Here 
the dream is presented as the aetiology of mental derangement, although we should be 
making a statement equally consistent with the facts were we to say that the first 
manifestation of the mental derangement occurred in the dreamlife, that-the disorder 
first broke through in the dream. In other instances, the morbid symptoms are included in 
the dream-life, or the psychosis remains confined to the dream-life Thus Thomayer calls 
our attention to anxiety-dreams which must be conceived as the equivalent of epileptic 
attacks. Allison has described cases of nocturnal insanity (see Radestock), in which the 
subjects are apparently perfectly well in the day-time, while hallucinations, fits of 
frenzy, and the like regularly make their appearance at night. De Sanctis and Tissie 
record similar observations (the equivalent of a paranoic dream in an alcoholic, voices 
accusing a wife of infidelity). Tissie records many observations of recent date in- which 
behaviour of a pathological character (based on delusory hypotheses, obsessive impulses) 
had their origin in dreams. Guislain describes a case in which sleep was replaced by an 
intermittent in sanity.
We cannot doubt that one day the physician will concern himself not only with the psychol-
¹Among the more recent authors who have occupied themselves with these relations are: 
Fere, Ideler, Lasegue, Pichon, Regis Vespa, Giessler, Kazodowsky, Pachantoni, and others.
²The real determining cause of the madness.—Ed.

ogy, but also with the psycho-pathology of dreams.
In cases of convalescence from insanity, it is often especially obvious that while the 
functions may be healthy by day the dream-life may still partake of the psychosis. 
Gregory is said to have been the first to call attention to such cases (see Krauss). 
Maeario (cited by Tissie) gives an account of a maniac who, a week after his complete 
recovery, once more experienced in dreams the flux of ideas and the unbridled, impulses 
of his disease.
Concerning the changes which the dream-life undergoes in chronic psychotics, little 
research has been undertaken as yet.. On the other hand, early attention was given to the 
inner relationship between dreams and mental disturbances, a relationship which is 
demonstrated by the complete agreement of the manifestations occurring in each. According 
to Maury, Cabanis, in his Rapports du Physique et du Moral, was the first to call 
attention to this relationship; he was followed by Lelut, J. Moreau, and more 
particularly the philosopher Maine de Biran. The comparison between the two is of course 
older still. Radestock begins the chapter in which he deals with the subject by citing a 
number of opinions which insist on the analogy between insanity and dreaming. Kant says 
somewhere: "The lunatic is a dreamer in the waking state." According to Krauss, "Insanity 
is a dream in which the senses are awake." Schopenhauer terms the dream a brief insanity, 
and insanity a long dream. Hagen describes delirium as a dream-life which is inducted not 
by sleep but by disease. Wundt, in his Physiologische Psychologie, declares: "As a matter 
of fact we ourselves may in dreams experience almost all the manifestations which we 
observe in the asylums for the insane."

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 189b-190a
My friend Otto is now standing next to the patient, and my friend Leopold examines her 
and calls attention to a dulness low down on the left side. My friend Leopold also is a 
physician, and a relative of Otto's. Since the two practice the same specialty, fate has 
made them competitors, so that they are constantly being compared with one another. Both 
of them assisted me for years, while I was still directing, a public clinic for neurotic 
children. There, scenes like that reproduced in my dream had often taken place. While I 
would be discussing the diagnosis of a case with Qtto, Leopold would examine the child 
anew and make an unexpected contribution towards our decision. There was a difference of 
character between the two men like that between Inspector Brasig and his friend Karl. 
Otto was remarkably prompt and alert; Leopold was slow and thoughtful, but thorough. If I 
contrast Otto and the cautious Leopold in the dream I do so, apparently, in order to 
extol Leopold. The conv parison is like that made above between the disobedient patient 
Irma and her friend, who was believed to be more sensible. I now become aware of one of 
the tracks along which the association of ideas in the dream proceeds: from the sick 
child to the children's clinic. Concerning the dulness low on the left side, I have the 
impression that it corresponds with a certain case of which all the details were similar, 
a case in which Leopold impressed me by his thoroughness. I thought vaguely, too, of 
something like a metastatic affection, but it might also be a reference to the patient 
whom I should have liked to have in Irma's place. For this lady, as far as I can gather, 
exhibited symptoms which imitated tuberculosis.
An infiltrated portion of skin on the left shoulder. I know at once that this is my own 
rheumatism of the shoulder, which I always feel if I lie awake long at night. The very 
phrasing of the dream sounds ambiguous: Something- which I can feel, as he does, in spite 
of the dress. "Feel on my own body" is intended. Further, it occurs to me how unusual the 
phrase infiltrated portion of skin sounds. We are accustomed to the phrase: "an 
infiltration of the upper posterior left”; this would refer to the lungs, and thus; 
once more, to tuberculosis.
In spite of the dress. This, to be sure, is only an interpolation. At. the clinic the 
children were, of course, examined undressed; here we have some contrast to the manner in 
which adult female patients have to be examined. The story used to be told of an eminent 
physician that he always Examined his patients through their clothes. The rest is obscure 
to me; I have, frankly, no inclination to follow the matter further.
Dr. M says: "It's an infection, but it doesn't matter; dysentery will follow, and the 
poison will be eliminated." This, at first, seems to me ridiculous; nevertheless, like 
everything else, it must be carefully analysed; more closely observed it seems after all 
to have a sort of meaning. What I had found in the patient was a local diphtheritis. I 
remember the discussion about diphtheritis and diphtheria at the time of my daughter's 
illness. Diphtheria is the general infection which proceeds from local diphtheritis. 
Leopold demonstrates the existence of such a general infection by the dulness, which also 
suggests a metastatic focus. I believe, how ever, that just this kind of metastasis does 
not occur in the case of diphtheria. It reminds me rather of pyaemia.
It doesn't matter is a consolation. I believe it fits in as follows: The last part of the 
dream has yielded a content to the effect that the patient's sufferings are the result of 
a serious organic affection. I begin to suspect that by this I am only trying to shift 
the blame from my self. Psychic treatment cannot be held responsible for the continued 
presence of a diphtheritic affection. Now, indeed, I am distressed by the thought of 
having invented such a serious illness for Irma, for the sole purpose of ex culpating 
myself. It seems so cruel. Accordingly, I need the assurance that the outcome will be 
benign, and it seems to me that I made a good choice when I put the words that con soled 
me into the mouth of Dr. M. But here I am placing myself in a position of superiority to 
the dream; a fact which needs explanation;
But why is this consolation so nonsensical? Dysentery. Some sort of farfetched 
theoretical notion that the toxins of disease might be eliminated through the intestines. 
Am I thereby trying to make fun of Dr. M's remark able store of far-fetched explanations, 
his habit of conceiving curious pathological relations?
Dysentery suggests something else. A few months ago I had in my care a young man who was 
suffering from remarkable intestinal troubles; a case which had been treated by other 
colleagues as one of "anaemia with malnutrition." I realized that it was a case of 
hysteria; I was unwilling to use my psycho-therapy on him, and sent him off on a 
sea-voyage. Now a few days previously I had received a despairing letter from him; he 
wrote from Egypt, saying that he had had a fresh attack, which the doctor had declared to 
be dysentery. I suspect that the diagnosis is merely an error on the part of an ignorant 
colleague, who is allowing himself to be fooled by the hysteria; yet I can not help 
reproaching myself for putting the invalid in a position where he might contract some 
organic affection of the bowels in addition to his hysteria. Furthermore, dysentery 
sounds not unlike diphtheria, a word which does not occur in the dream.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 194b-d
Such convenience-dreams came very frequently to me in my youth. Accustomed as I had 
always been to working until late at night, early waking was always a matter of 
difficulty. I used then to dream that I was out of bed and standing at the wash-stand. 
After a while I could no longer shut out the knowledge that I was not yet up; but in the 
meantime I had continued to sleep. The same sort of lethargy-
¹The facts relating to dreams of thirst were known also to Weygandt, who speaks, of them 
as follows; "It is just this sensation of thirst which is registered most accurately: of 
all; it always causes a representation of quenching the thirst. The manner in which the 
dream represents the act of quenching the thirst is manifold, and is specified in 
accordance with some recent recollection. A universal phenomenon noticeable here is the; 
fact that the representation of quenching the thirst is immediately followed by 
disappointment in the inefficacy of the imagined refreshment." But he overlooks the 
universal character of the reaction of the dream to the stimulus. If other persons who 
are troubled by thirst at night awake without dreaming beforehand, this does not 
constitute an; objection to my experiment, but characterizes them as persons who sleep 
less soundly. Cf. Isaiah, 29. 8.
dream was dreamed by a young colleague of mine, who appears to share my propensity for 
sleep. With him it assumed a particularly amusing form. The landlady with whom he was 
lodging in the neighbourhood of the hospital had strict orders to wake him every morning 
at a given hour, but she found it by no means easy to carry out his orders. One morning 
sleep was especially sweet to him. The woman called into his room: "Herr Pepi, get up; 
you've got to go to the hospital." Whereupon the sleeper dreamt of a room in the 
hospital, of a bed in which he was lying, and of a chart pinned over his head, which read 
as follows: "Pepi M, medical, student, 22 years of age." He told himself in the dream: 
"If I am already at the hospital, I don't have to go there," turned over, and slept on. 
He had thus frankly ad mitted to himself his motive for dreaming.
Here is yet another dream of which the stimulus was active during sleep: One of my women 
patients, who had been obliged to undergo an unsuccessful operation on the jaw, was 
instructed by her physicians to wear by day and night a cooling apparatus on the affected 
cheek; but she was in the habit of throwing it off as soon as she had fallen asleep. One 
day I was asked to reprove her for doing so; she had again thrown the apparatus on the 
floor. The patient defended herself as follows: "This time I really couldn't help it; it 
was the result of a dream which I had during the night. In the dream I was in a box at 
the opera, and was taking a lively interest in the performance. But Herr Karl Meyer was 
lying in the sanatorium and complaining pitifully on account of pains in his jaw. I said 
to myself, 'Since I haven't the pains, I don't need the apparatus either'; that's why I 
threw it away." The dream of this poor sufferer reminds me of an expression which comes 
to our lips when we are in a disagreeable situation: "Well, I can imagine more amusing 
things!" The dream presents these "more amusing things!" Herr Karl Meyer, to whom the 
dreamer attributed her pains, was the most casual acquaintance of  whom she could think.
It is quite as simple a matter to discover the wish-fulfilment in several other dreams 
which I have collected from healthy persons. A friend who was acquainted with my theory 
of dreams, and had explained it to his wife, said to me one day: "My wife asked me to 
tell you that she dreamt yesterday that she was having her menses. You will know what 
that means." Of course I know: if the young wife dreams that she is having her menses, 
the menses have stopped. I can well imagine that she would have liked to enjoy her 
freedom a little longer, before the discomforts of maternity began. It was a clever way 
of giving notice of her first pregnancy. Another friend writes that his wife had dreamt 
not long ago that she noticed milk-stains on the front of her blouse. This also is an 
indication of pregnancy, but not of the first one; the young mother hoped she would have 
more nourishment for the second child than she had for the first.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 197b-198d
IV. Distortion in Dreams
If I now declare that wish-fulfilment is the meaning of every dream, so that there cannot
¹A more searching investigation into the phychic life of the child teaches us, of 
course, that sexual motives, in infantile forms, play a very considerable part, which has 
been too long overlooked, in the psychic, activity of the child. This permits us to doubt 
to some extent the happiness of the child, as imagined later by adults. Cf. Three 
Contributions to the Theory of Sex.
²It should be mentioned that young children often have more complex and obscure dreams, 
while, on the other hand, adults, in certain circumstances, often have dreams of a simple 
and infantile character. How rich in unsuspected content the dreams of children no more 
than four or five years of age may be is shown by the examples in my "Analysis of a 
Phobia in a five-year old Boy," Collected Papers, III, and Jung's "Experiences Concerning 
the Psychic Life of the; Child," translated by Brill, American Journal of Psychology. 
April, 1910. For analytically interpreted dreams of children, see also yon Hug-Hellmuth, 
Putnam, Raalte, Spielrein, and Tausk; others by Banchieri, Busemann, Doglia, and 
especially Wigam, who emphasizes the wish-fulfilling tendency of such dreams. On the 
other hand, it seems that dreams of an infantile type reappear with especial frequency in 
adults who are transferred into the midst of unfamiliar conditions. Thus Otto 
Nordenskjold, in his book, Antarctic (1904, vol. i, p. 336), writes as follows of the 
crew who spent the winter with him: "Very characteristic of the trend of our inmost 
thoughts were our dreams, which were never more vivid and more numerous. Even those of 
our comrades with whom dreaming was formerly exceptional had long stories to tell in the 
morning when we exchanged our experiences in the world of phantasy. They all had 
reference to that outside world which was now so; far removed from us, but they often 
fitted into our immediate, circumstances. An especially characteristic dream was that in 
which one of our comrades believed himself back at school, where the task was assigned to 
him of skinning miniature seals, which were manufactured especially for purposes of 
instruction. Eating and drinking constituted the pivot around which most of our dreams 
revolved. One of us, who was especially fond of going to big dinner-parties, was 
delighted if he could report in the morning 'that he had had a three-course dinner.' 
Another dreamed of tobacco, whole mountains of tobacco; yet another dreamed of a ship 
approaching on the open sea under full sail. Still another dream deserves to be 
mentioned: The postman brought the post and gave a long explanation of why it was so long 
delayed; he had de livered it at the wrong address, and only with great trouble was he 
able to get it back. To be sure, we were often occupied in our sleep with still more 
impossible things, but the lack of phantasy in almost all the dreams which I myself 
dreamed, or heard others relate, was quite striking. It would certainly have been of 
great psychological interest if all these dreams could have been recorded. But one can 
readily understand how we longed for sleep. That alone, could afford us everything that 
we all most ardently desired." I will continue by a quotation from Du Prel (p. 231): 
"Mungo Park, nearly dying of thirst on one of his African expeditions, dreamed constantly 
of the well-watered valleys and meadows of his home. Similarly Trenck, tortured by hunger 
in the fortress of Magdeburg, saw himself surrounded by copious meals. And George Back, a 
member of Franklin's first expedition, when he was on the point of death by starvation, 
dreamed continually and invariably of plenteous meals."
³A Hungarian proverb cited by Ferenczi states more explicitly that "the pig dreams of 
acorns, the goose of maize." A Jewish proverb asks: "Of what does the hen dream?"—"Of 
millet" (Sammlung jud. Sprichw. u. Redensarien., edit, by Bernstein; 2nd ed:, p. 116).
⁴I am far from wishing to assert that no previous writer has ever thought of tracing a 
dream to a wish. (Cf. the first passages of the next chapter.) Those interested in the 
subject will find that even in antiquity the physician Herophilos, who lived under the 
First Ptolemy, distinguished between three kinds of dreams: dreams sent by the gods; 
natural dreams—those which come about whenever the soul creates for itself an image of 
that which is beneficial to it, and will come to pass; and mixed dreams — those which 
originate spontaneously from the juxtaposition of images, when we see that which we 
desire. From the examples collected by Schemer, J. Starcke cites a dream which was 
described by the author himself as a wish-fulfilment (p. 239). Schemer says: "The 
phantasy immediately fulfills the dreamer's wish, simply because this existed vividly in 
the mind." This dream belongs to the "emotional dreams." Akin to it are dreams due to 
"masculine and feminine erotic longing," and to "irritable moods." As will readily be 
seen, Schemer does not ascribe to the wish any further significance for the dream than to 
any other psychic condition of the waking state; least of all does he insist on the 
connection between the wish and the essential nature of the dream.
be any dreams other than wish-dreams, I know beforehand that I shall meet with the most 
emphatic contradiction. My critics will object: "The fact that there are dreams which are 
to be understood as fulfilments of wishes is not new, but has long since been recognized 
by such writers as Radestock, Volkelt, Purkinje, Griesinger and others.¹ That there can 
be no other dreams than those of wish-fulfilments is yet one more unjustified 
generalization, which, fortunately, can be easily refuted. Dreams which present the most 
painful content, and not the least trace of; wish-fulfilment, occur frequently enough. 
The pessimistic philosopher, Eduard von Hartmann, is perhaps most completely opposed to 
the theory of wish-fulfilment. In his Philosophy of the Unconscious, Part II (Stereotyped 
German edition, p. 344), he says: 'As regards the dream, with it all the troubles of 
waking life pass over into the sleeping state; all save the one thing which may in some 
degree reconcile the cultured person with life—scientific and artistic enjoyment. . . 
.' But even less pessimistic observers have emphasized the fact that in our dreams pain 
and disgust are more frequent than pleasure (Scholz, p. 33; Volkelt, p. 80, et al.). Two
ladies, Sarah Weed and Florence Hallam, have even worked out, on the basis of their 
dreams, a numerical value for the preponderance: of distress and discomfort in dreams. 
They find that 58 per cent of dreams are disagreeable, and only 28.6 positively pleasant. 
Besides those dreams that convey into our sleep the many painful emotions of life, there 
are also anxiety-dreams, in which this most terrible of all the painful emotions torments 
us until we wake. Now it is precisely by these anxiety dreams that children are so often 
haunted (cf. Debacker on Pavor nocturnus); and yet it was in children that you found the 
wish-fulfilment dream in its most obvious form."
The anxiety-dream does really seem to preclude a generalization of the thesis deduced 
from the examples given in the last chapter, that dreams are wish-fulfilments, and even 
to condemn it as an absurdity.
Nevertheless, it is not difficult to parry these apparently invincible objections. It is 
merely necessary to observe that our doctrine is not based upon the estimates of the 
obvious dream content, but relates to the thought-content, which, in the course of 
interpretation, is found
¹Already Plotinus, the neo-Platonist, said: "When desire bestirs itself, then comes 
phantasy, and presents to us, as it were, the object of desire" (Du Prel, p. 276).
to lie behind the dream. Let us compare and contrast the manifest and the latent dream 
content. It is true that there are dreams the manifest content of which is of the most 
painful nature. But has anyone ever tried to interpret these dreams—to discover their 
latent thought-content? If not, the two objections to our doctrine are no longer valid; 
for there is always the possibility that even our painful and terrifying dreams may, upon 
interpretation, prove to be wish fulfilments.²
In scientific research it is often advantageous if the solution of one problem presents 
difficulties, to add to it a second problem; just as it is easier to crack two nuts 
together instead of separately. Thus, we are confronted not only with the problem: How 
can painful and terrifying dreams be the fulfilments of wishes? but we may add to this a 
second problem which arises from the foregoing discussion of the general problem of the 
dream: Why do not the dreams that show an indifferent content, and yet turn out to be 
wish fulfilments, reveal their meaning without disguise? Take the exhaustively treated 
dream of Irma's injection: it is by no means of a painful character, and it may be 
recognized, upon interpretation, as a striking wish-fulfilment. But why is an 
interpretation necessary at all? Why does not the dream say directly what it means? As a 
matter of fact, the dream of Irma's injection does not at first produce the impression 
that it represents a wish of the dreamer's as fulfilled; The reader will not have 
received this impression, and even I myself was not aware of the fact until I had 
undertaken the analysis. If we call this peculiarity of dreams—namely, that they need 
elucidation— the phenomenon of distortion in dreams, a second question then arises: 
What is the origin of this distortion in dreams?
If one's first thoughts on this subject were
²It is quite incredible with what obstinacy readers and critics have excluded this 
consideration and dis regarded the fundamental differentiation between the manifest and 
the latent dream-content. Nothing in the literature of the subject approaches so closely 
to my own conception of dreams as a passage in J. Sully's essay, Dreams as a Revelation 
(and it is not because I do not think it valuable that I allude to it here for the first 
time): "It would seem then, after all, that dreams are not the utter nonsense they have 
been said to be by such authorities as Chaucer, Shakespeare, and Milton. The chaotic 
aggregations of our night-fancy have a significance and communicate new knowledge. Like 
some letter in cipher, the dream-inscription when scrutinized closely loses its first 
look of balderdash and takes on the aspect of a serious, intelligible message. Or, to 
vary the figure slightly, we may say that, like some palimpsest, the dream discloses 
beneath its worth less surface-characters traces of an old and precious communication" 
(p. 364).
consulted, several possible solutions might suggest themselves: for example, that during 
sleep one is incapable of finding an adequate expression for one's dream-thoughts. The 
analysis of certain dreams, however, compels us to offer another explanation. I shall 
demonstrate this by means of a second dream of my own, which again involves numerous 
indiscretions, but which compensates for this personal sacrifice by affording a thorough 
elucidation of the problem.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 204c-d
In hysteria, identification is most frequently employed to express a sexual community. 
The hysterical woman identifies herself by her symptoms most readily—though not 
exclusively—with persons with whom she has had sexual relations, or who have had sexual 
intercourse with the same persons as herself. Language takes cognizance of this tendency: 
two lovers are said to be "one." In hysterical phantasy, as well as in dreams, 
identification may ensue if one simply thinks of sexual relations; they need not 
necessarily become actual. The patient is merely following the rules of the hysterical 
processes of thought when she expresses her jealousy of her friend (which, for that 
matter, she her self admits to be unjustified) by putting herself in her friend's place 
in her dream, and identifying herself with her by fabricating a symptom (the denied 
wish). One might further elucidate the process by saying: In the dream she puts herself 
in the place of her friend, because her friend has taken her own place in relation to her 
husband, and because she would like to take her friend's place in her husband's esteem.¹
The contradiction of my theory of dreams on the part of another female patient, the most 
intelligent of all my dreamers, was solved in a simpler fashion, though still in 
accordance with the principle that the non-fulfilment of one
¹I myself regret the inclusion of such passages from the psycho-pathology of hysteria, 
which, because of their fragmentary presentation, and because they are torn out of their 
context, cannot prove to be very illuminating. If these passages are capable of throwing 
any light upon the intimate5 relations' between dream and the psycho-neurosis, they have 
served the intention with which I have included them.
wish signified the fulfilment of another. I had one day explained to her that a dream is 
a wish fulfilment. On the following day she related a dream to the effect that she was 
travelling with her mother-in-law to the place in which they were both to spend the 
summer. Now I knew that she had violently protested against spending the summer in the 
neighbourhood of her mother-in-law, I also knew that she had fortunately been able to 
avoid doing so, since she had recently succeeded in renting a house in a place quite 
remote from that to which her mother-in-law was going. And now the dream reversed this 
desired solution. Was not this a flat contradiction of my theory of wish-fulfilment? One 
had only to draw the inferences from this dream in order to arrive at its interpretation. 
According to this dream, I was wrong; but it was her wish that I should be wrong, and 
this wish the dream showed her as fulfilled. But the wish that I should be wrong, which 
was fulfilled in the theme of the country house, referred in reality to another and more 
serious matter. At that time I had inferred, from the material furnished by her analysis, 
that something of significance in respect to her illness must have occurred at a certain 
time in her life. She had denied this, because it was not present in her memory. We soon 
came to see that I was right. Thus her wish that I should prove to be wrong, which was 
transformed into the dream that she was going into the country with her mother-in-law, 
corresponded with the justifiable wish that those things which were then only suspected 
had never occurred.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, 230b-231c
I must forego a detailed analysis of the two remaining portions of the dream; I shall 
single out only those elements which lead me back to the two scenes of my childhood for 
the sake of which alone I have selected the dream. The reader will rightly assume that it 
is sexual, material which necessitates the suppression; but he may not be content with 
this explanation. There are many things of which one makes no secret to oneself,, but 
which must be treated as secrets in addressing others, and here we are concerned not with 
the reasons which induce me to conceal the solution, but with the motive of the inner 
censorship which conceals the real con tent of the dream even from myself. Concerning 
this, I will confess that the analysis reveals these three portions of the dream, as 
impertinent boasting, the exuberance of an absurd megalomania, long ago suppressed in, my 
waking fife, which, however, dares to show itself, with individual ramifications, even in 
the manifest dream-content (it seems to me that I am a cunning fellow), making the 
high-spirited mood of the evening before the dream perfectly intelligible. Boasting of 
every kind, indeed; thus, the mention of Graz points to the phrase: "What price Graz?" 
which one is wont to use when one feels unusually wealthy. Readers who recall Master 
Rabelais's inimitable description of the life and deeds of Gargantua and his son 
Pantagruel will be able to enroll even the suggested content of the first portion of the 
dream among the boasts to which I have alluded. But the following belongs to the two 
scenes of childhood of which I have spoken: I had bought a new trunk for this journey, 
the colour of which, a brownish violet, appears in the dream several times (violet-brown 
violets of a stiff cloth, on an object which is known as a girl-catcher- the furniture in 
the ministerial chambers). Children, we know, believe that one attracts people's 
attention with anything new. Now I have been told of the following incident of my 
childhood; my recollection of the occurrence itself has been replaced by my recollection 
of the story. I am told that at the age of two I still used occasionally to wet my bed, 
and that when I was reproved for doing so I consoled my father by promising to buy him a 
beautiful new red bed in N (the nearest large town). Hence, the interpolation in the. 
dream, that, we had bought the urinal in the city or had to buy it; one must keep one's 
promises. (One should note, moreover, the association pf the male urinal and the woman's 
trunk, box.) All the megalomania of the child is contained in this promise. The 
significance of dreams of urinary difficulties in the case of children has already been 
considered in the interpretation of ah earlier dream (cf. the dream on p. 208). The 
psycho-analysis of neurotics has taught us to recognize the intimate connection between 
wetting the bed and the character trait of ambition.
Then, when Iwas seven or eight years of age another domestic incident occurred which I 
remember very well. One evening, before going to bed, I had disregarded the dictates of 
discretion, and had satisfied my needs in my parents' bedroom, and in their presence. 
Reprimanding me for this delinquency, my father remarked: "That boy wilt never amount to 
anything." This must have been a terrible affront to my ambition, for allusions to this 
scene recur again and again in my dreams, and are constantly coupled with enumerations of 
my accomplishments and successes, as though I wanted to say: "You see, I have amounted to 
something after all." This childish scene furnishes the elements for the last image of 
the dream, in which the r61es are interchanged, of course for the purpose of revenge. The 
elderly man obviously my father, for the blindness in one eye signifies his one-sided 
glaucoma,¹ is now urinating before me as I once urinated before him. By means of the 
glaucoma I re mind my father of cocaine, which stood him in good stead during his 
operation, as though I had thereby fulfilled my promise. Besides, I make sport of him; 
since he is blind, I must hold the glass in front of him, and I delight in allusions to 
my knowledge of the theory of hysteria, of which I am proud.²
¹Another interpretation: He is one-eyed like Odin, the father of the gods^—Odin's 
consolation. The consolation in the childish scene: I will buy him a new bed.
²Here is some more material for interpretation: Holding the urine-glass recalls the 
story, of a peasant (illiterate) at the optician's, who tried on now one pair of 
spectacles, now another, but was still, unable to read.—(Peasant-catcher—girl-catcher 
in the preceding portion of the dream.)—The peasants' treatment of the feeble-minded 
father, in Zola's La Terre—- The tragic atonement, that in his last days my father 
soiled his bed like a child; hence, I am his nurse in the dream.—"Thinking and 
experiencing are here, as it were, identical"; this recalls a highly revolutionary closet 
drama by Oscar Panizza, in which God, the Father, is ignominiously treated as a palsied 
greybeard. With Him will and deed are one, and in the book he has to be restrained by His 
archangel, a sort of Gany-mede, from scolding and swearing, because His curses would 
immediately be fulfilled.—Making plans is a reproach against my father, dating from a 
later period in the development of the critical faculty, much as the whole rebellious 
content of the dream, which commits Use majeste and scorns authority, may be traced to a 
revolt against my father. The sovereign is called the father of his country 
(Landesvater), and the father is the first and oldest, and for the child the only 
authority, from whose absolutism the other social authorities have evolved in the course 
of the history of human civilization (in so far as mother-right does not necessitate a 
qualification of this doctrine). — The words which occurred to me in the dream, 
"thinking and experiencing are the same thing," refer to the explanation of hysterical 
symptoms, with which the male urinal (glass) is also associated.—I need not explain the 
principle of Gschnas to a Viennese; it consists in constructing objects of rare and 
costly appearance out of trivial, and preferably comical and worthless material—for 
example, making suits of armour out of kitchen utensils, wisps of straw and Salzstangeln 
(long rolls), as our artists are fond of doing at their jolly parties. I had learned that 
hysterical subjects do the same thing; besides what really happens to them, they 
unconsciously conceive for them selves horrible or extravagantly fantastic incidents, 
which they build up out of the most harmless and commonplace material of actual 
experience. The symptoms attach themselves primarily to these phantasies, not to the 
memory of real events, whether serious or trivial. This explanation had helped me to 
overcome many difficulties, and afforded me much pleasure. I was able to allude to it by 
means of the dream-element "male urine-glass," because I had been told that at the last 
Gschnas evening a poison-chalice of Lucretia Borgia's had been exhibited, the chief 
constituent of which had consisted of a glass urinal for men, such as is used in 
hospitals.

If the two childish scenes of urination are, according to my theory, closely associated 
with the desire for greatness, their resuscitation on the journey to the Aussee was 
further favoured by; the accidental circumstance that my compartment had no lavatory, and 
that I must be prepared to postpone relief during the journey, as actually happened in 
the morning when I woke with the sensation of a bodily need; I suppose one might be 
inclined to credit this sensation with being the actual stimulus of the dream; I should, 
however, prefer a different explanation, namely, that the dream-thoughts first gave rise 
to the desire to urinate. It is quite unusual for me to be disturbed in sleep by any 
physical need, least of all at the time when I woke on this occasion—a quarter to four 
in the morning. I would forestall a further objection by remarking that I have hardly 
ever felt a desire to urinate after waking early on other journeys made under-more 
comfortable circumstances. However, I can leave this point undecided without weakening my 
argument. 
Further, since experience in dream-analysis has drawn my attention to the fact that even 
from dreams the interpretation of which seems at first sight complete, because the dream 
sources and the wish-stimuli are easily demonstrable, important trains of thought proceed 
which reach back into the earliest years of childhood, I had to ask myself-whether this 
characteristic does not even constitute an essential condition of dreaming. If it were 
permissible to generalize this notion, I should say that every dream is connected through 
its manifest content with recent experiences, while through its latent content it is 
connected with the most remote experiences; and I can actually show in the analysis of 
hysteria that these re mote experiences have in a very real sense remained recent right 
up to the present. But I still find it very difficult to prove this conjecture; T shall 
have to return to the probable role in dream-formation of the earliest experiences of our 
childhood in another connection (chapter vii).

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, 252c-340a
With regard to typical dreams of the death of relatives, I must add a few words upon 
their significance from the point of view of the theory of dreams in general. These 
dreams show us the occurrence of ai very unusual state of things; they show us that the 
dream-thought created by the repressed wish completely escapes the censorship, and is 
transferred to the dream without alteration. Special conditions must obtain in order to 
make this possible. The following two factors favour the production of these dreams: 
first, this is the last wish that we could credit ourselves with harbouring; we believe 
such a wish "would never occur to us even in a dream"; the dream-censorship is therefore 
unprepared for this monstrosity, just as the laws of Solon did not foresee the necessity 
of establishing  a penalty for, patricide.  Secondly, the repressed and unsuspected wish 
is,' in this special case, frequently met half-way by a residue from the day's 
experience, in the from of some concern for the life of the be loved person. This anxiety 
cannot enter into the dream otherwise than by taking advantage of the corresponding wish; 
but the wish is able to mask itself behind the concern which has been aroused, during the 
clay. If one is inclined to think that all this is really a very much simpler process, 
and to imagine that one merely continues during the night, and in one's dream, What was 
begun during the day, one remove is the dreams of the death of those dear to us but of 
all connection with the general explanation of dreams, and a problem that may very Well 
be solved remains a problem needlessly. It is instructive to trace the relation of these 
dreams to anxiety-dreams. In dreams of the death of those dear to us the repressed wish 
has found a way of avoiding the censorship— and the distortion for which the censorship 
is responsible. An invariable concomitant phenomenon, then, is that painful emotions are 
felt in the dream. Similarly, an anxiety-dream occurs only When the censorship is 
entirely or partially overpowered, and on the other hand, the overpowering of the 
censorship is facilitated when the actual sensation of anxiety is already present from1 
somatic sources. It thus becomes obvious for What purpose the censorship performs its 
office arid (practises dream-distortion; it does so in order to prevent the development 
of anxiety or other forms of painful affect. 
I have spoken in the foregoing sections of the egoism, of the child's psyche, and now 
emphasize this peculiarity in order to suggest a connection, for dreams too have retained 
this characteristic. All dreams are absolutely egoistical; in every dream the, beloved 
ego appears, even though.in, a disguised form. The wishes that are realized, in dreams 
are invariably the wishes of this ego; it is only a deceptive appearance if interest in 
another person is believed to have evoked a dream. I wilt now analyse a few examples 
which appear to contradict this assertion.
I
A boy not yet four years of age relates the following dream: He saw a large garnished, 
dish, on which was a large joint of roast meat; and the joint was suddenly—not 
carved-—but eaten up. He did not see the person who ate it.¹
Who can he be, this strange person, of whose luxurious repast the little fellow dreams? 
The experience of the day must supply the answer. For some days past the boy, in 
accordance with the doctor's orders, had been living on a milk diet; but on the evening 
of the dream-day he had been naughty, and as a punishment, had
¹Even the large, over-abundant, immoderate and exaggerated things occurring in dreams 
may be a childish characteristic. A child wants nothing more intensely than to grow big, 
and to eat as much of everything as grown-ups do; a child is hard to satisfy; he knows no 
such word as enough and insatiably demands the repetition of whatever has pleased him or 
tasted good to him. He learns to practise moderation, to be modest and resigned, only 
through training. As we know, the neurotic also is inclined to1 immoderation and excess.
been deprived of his supper. He had already undergone one such hunger-cure, and had borne 
his deprivation bravely. He knew that he would get nothing, but he did not even allude to 
the fact that he was hungry. Training was beginning to produce its effect; this is 
demonstrated even by the dream, Which reveals the beginnings of dream-distortion. There 
is no doubt that he himself is the person whose, desires are directed toward this 
abundant meal, and a meal of roast meat, at that. But since he knows that this is 
forbidden him he does not dare, as hungry children do in dreams (cf. my little Anna's 
dream about strawberries, p. 192); to sit down to the meal himself. The person remains 
anonymous.
II
One night I dream that 1 see on a bookseller's counter ai new volume of one of those 
collectors series, which I am in the habit of buying (monographs on artistic subjects, 
history., famous artistic centres, etc.). The new, collection is entitled "Famous 
Orators'' (or Orations), and the first number bears the name of
On analysis it seems to  me improbable that the fame of Dr. Lecher, the long-winded 
speaker of. the German Opposition, should occupy my thoughts while I am dreaming. The 
fact is that a few days ago I undertook the psycho-logical treatment, of some new 
patients, and am now forced to talk for ten to twelve hours a day. Thus I myself am 
along-winded speaker.
III
On another occasion I dream that a university lecturer of my acquaintance says to me: "My 
son, the myopic.” Then follows a dialogue of brief observations and replies. A third 
portion of the dream follows, in which I and my sons appear, and so far as the latent 
dream content is concerned, the father, the son, and Professor M, are merely lay figures, 
representing myself and my eldest son. Later on I shall examine this dream again, on 
account of another peculiarity.
IV
The following dream gives an example of really base, egoistical feelings, which conceal 
themselves behind an affectionate concern: 
My friend Otto looks ill; his face is brown and his eyes protrude.
Otto is my family physician, to whom I own a debt greater than I can ever hope to repay, 
since he has watched 'for years over the health of my children, has treated them 
successfully When they have been ill, and, moreover, has given them presents whenever he 
could find any excuse for doing so. He paid us a visit on the day of the dream, and my 
wife noticed that he looked tired and exhausted. At night I dream of him, and my dream 
attributes to him certain of the symptoms of Basedow's disease. If you were to disregard 
my rules for dream interpretation you would understand this dream to mean that I am 
concerned about the health of my friend, and that this concern is realized in the dream. 
It would thus constitute a contradiction not only of the assertion that a dream is a wish 
fulfilment, but also of the assertion that it is  accessible, only to egoistical 
impulses. But will those who thus interpret my dream explain why I should fear that Otto 
has Basedow's, disease, for which diagnosis his appearance does not afford the slightest 
justification? My analysis, on the other hand, furnishes the following material, deriving 
from an incident which had occurred six years earlier. We were driving—a. small party 
of us, including Professor R—in the dark through the forest of K, which lies at a 
distance of some hours from where we were staying in the country. The driver, who was not 
quite sober, overthrew us arid the carriage down a bank,  and it was only by good fortune 
that we all escaped unhurt. But we were forced to spend the night at the nearest inn, 
where the news of Our mishap aroused great sympathy. A certain gentleman, who showed 
unmistakable symptoms of morbus Basedowii—the brownish colour of the skin of the face 
and the protruding eyes, but no goitre —placed himself entirely at our disposal, and 
asked what he could do for us. Professor R answered in his decisive way, "Nothing, except 
lend me a nightshirt." Whereupon our generous friend replied: "I am sorry, but I cannot 
do that," and left us.
In continuing the analysis, it occurs to me that Basedow is the name not only of a 
physician but also of a famous pedagogue. (Now that I am wide awake, I do not feel quite 
sure of this fact.) My friend Otto is the person whom I have asked to take charge of the 
physical education of my children—especially during the age of puberty (hence the 
nightshirt) in case any thing should happen to me. By seeing Otto in my dream with the 
morbid symptoms of our above-mentioned generous helper, I clearly mean to say: "If 
anything happens to me, he will do just as little for my children as Baron L did for us, 
in spite of his amiable offers."
The egoistical flavour of this dream should now be obvious enough.¹
But where is the wish-fulfilment to be found in this? Not in the vengeance wreaked on my 
friend Otto (who seems to be fated to be badly treated in my dreams), but in the 
following circumstance: Inasmuch as in my dream I represented Otto as Baron L, I likewise 
identified myself with another person, namely, with Professor R; for I have asked 
something of Otto, just as R asked something of Baron L at the time of the incident I 
have described. And this is the point. For Professor R has gone his way independently, 
outside academic circles, just as I myself have done, and has only in his later years 
received the title which he had earned long before. Once more, then, I want to be a 
professor! The very phrase in his later years is a wish-fulfilment, for it means that I 
shall live long enough to steer my boys through the age of puberty myself.
Of other typical dreams, in Which one flies with a feeling of ease or falls in terror, I 
know nothing from my own experience, and whatever I have to say about them I owe to my 
psycho-analyses. From the information thus obtained One must conclude that these dreams 
also reproduce impressions made in childhood—that is, that they refer to the games 
involving rapid motion which have such an extraordinary at traction for children. Where 
is the uncle who has never made a child fly by running with it across the room with 
outstretched arms, or has never played at falling with it by rocking it on his knee and 
then suddenly straightening his leg, or by lifting it above his head and suddenly 
pretending to withdraw his supporting hand? At such moments children shout with joy, and 
insatiably demand a repetition of the performance, especially if a little fright and 
dizziness
¹While Dr. Ernest Jones was delivering a lecture be fore an American scientific society, 
and was speaking of egoism in dreams, a learned lady took exception to this unscientific 
generalization. She thought the lecturer was entitled to pronounce such a verdict only on 
the dreams of Austrians, but had no right to include the dreams of Americans. As for 
herself, she was sure that all her dreams were strictly altruistic.
In justice to this lady with her national pride it may, however, be remarked that the 
dogma: "the dream is wholly egoistic" must not be misunderstood. For inasmuch as 
everything that occurs in preconscious thinking may appear in dreams (in the content as 
well as the latent dream-thoughts) the altruistic feelings may possibly occur. Similarly, 
affectionate or amorous feelings for another person, if they exist in the unconscious, 
may occur iii dreams. The truth of the assertion is therefore restricted to the fact that 
among the Unconscious stimuli of dreams one very often finds egoistical tendencies which 
seem to have been overcome in the waking state.

are involved in the game; in after years they repeat their sensations in dreams, but in 
dreams they omit the hands that held them, so that now they are free to float or fall. We 
know that all small children have a fondness for such games as rocking and see-sawing; 
and if they see gymnastic performances at the circus their recollection of such games is 
refreshed.¹ In some boys a hysterical attack will consist sim ply in the reproduction of 
such performances, which they accomplish with great dexterity. Not infrequently sexual 
sensations are excited by these games of movement, which are quite neutral in 
themselves.² To express the matter in a few words: the exciting games of childhood are 
repeated in dreams of flying, falling, reeling and the like, but the voluptuous feelings 
are now transformed into anxiety. But, as every mother knows, the excited play of 
children often enough culminates in quarrelling and tears.
I have therefore good reason for rejecting the explanation that it is the state of our 
der mal sensations during sleep, the sensation of the movements of the lungs, etc., that 
evokes dreams of flying and falling. I see that these very sensations have been 
reproduced from the memory to which the dream refers—and that they are, therefore, 
dream-content and not dream-sources.
I do not for a moment deny, however, that I am unable to furnish a full explanation of 
this series of typical dreams. Precisely here my material leaves me in the lurch. I must 
adhere to the general opinion that all the dermal and kinetic sensations of these typical 
dreams are awakened as soon as any psychic motive of whatever kind has need of them, and 
that they are neglected when there is no such need of them. The relation to infantile 
experiences seems to be confirmed by the indications which
¹Psycho-analytic investigation has enabled us to conclude that in the predilection shown 
by children for gymnastic performances, and in the repetition of these in hysterical 
attacks, there is, besides the pleasure felt in the organ, yet another factor at work 
(often unconscious): namely, a memory-picture of sexual intercourse observed in human 
beings or animals.
²A young colleague, who is entirely free from nervousness, tells me, in this connection: 
"I know from my own experience that while swinging, and at the moment at which the 
downward movement was at its maximum, I used to have a curious feeling in my genitals, 
which, although it was not really pleasing to me, I must describe as a voluptuous 
feeling." I have often heard from patients that the first erections with voluptuous 
sensations which they can remember to have had in boyhood occurred while they were 
climbing. It is established with complete certainty by psycho-analysis that the first 
sexual sensations often have their origin in the scufflings and wrestlings of childhood.

I have obtained from the analyses of psycho-neurotics. But I am unable to say what other 
meanings might, in the course of the dreamer's life, have become attached to the memory 
of these sensations—different, perhaps, in each individual, despite the typical 
appearance of these dreams—and I should very much like to be in a position to fill this 
gap with careful analyses of good examples. To those who wonder why I complain of a lack 
of material, despite the frequency of these dreams of flying, falling, tooth-drawing, 
etc., I must explain that I my self have never experienced any such dreams since I have 
turned my attention to the subject of dream-interpretation. The dreams of neurotics which 
are at.my .disposal, however, are not all capable of interpretation, and very often it is 
impossible to penetrate to the farthest point of their hidden intention; a certain 
psychic force which participated in the building up of the neurosis, and which again 
becomes active during its dissolution, opposes interpretation of the final problem.
(c) The Examination-Dream
Everyone who has received his certificate of matriculation after passing his final 
examination at school complains of the persistence with which he is plagued by 
anxiety-dreams in which he has failed, or must go through his course again, etc. For the 
holder of a university degree this typical dream is replaced by another, which represents 
that he has not taken his doctor's degree, to which he vainly objects, while still 
asleep, that he has already been practicing for years, or is already a university 
lecturer or the senior partner of a firm of lawyers, and soon. These are the ineradicable 
memories of the punishments we suffered as children for misdeeds which we had 
committed—memories which were revived in us on the dies irae, dies ilia³ of the 
gruelling examination at the two critical junctures in our careers as students. The 
examination-anxiety of neurotics is likewise intensified by this childish fear. When our 
student days are over, it is no longer our parents or teachers who see to our punishment; 
the in exorable chain of cause and effect of later life has taken over our further 
education. Now we dream of our matriculation, or the examination for the doctor's 
degree—and who has not been faint-hearted on such occasions?—whenever we fear that we 
may be punished by some unpleasant result because we have done some thing carelessly or 
wrongly, because we have
³Day of wrath.—Ed.
not been as thorough as we might have been—in short, whenever we feel the burden of 
responsibility.
For a further explanation of examination dreams I have to thank a remark made by a 
colleague who had studied this subject, who once stated, in the course of a scientific 
discussion, that in his experience the examination dream occurred only to persons who had 
passed the examination, never to those who had flunked. We have had increasing 
confirmation of the fact that the anxiety-dream of examination occurs when the dreamer is 
anticipating a re sponsible task on the following day, with the possibility of disgrace; 
recourse will then be had to an occasion in the past on which a great anxiety proved to 
have been without real justification, having, indeed, been refuted by the outcome. Such a 
dream would be a very striking example of the way in which the dream content is 
misunderstood by the waking in stance. The-exclamation which is regarded as a protest 
against the dream: "But I am already a doctor," etc., would in reality be the consolation 
offered by the dream, and should, therefore, be worded as follows: "Do not be afraid of 
the morrow; think pf the anxiety which you felt before your matriculation; yet nothing 
happened to justify it, for now you are a doctor," etc. But the anxiety which we 
attribute to the dream really has its origin in the residues of the dream-day.
The tests of this interpretation which I have been able to make in my own case, and in 
that of others, although by no means exhaustive, were entirely in its favour.¹ For 
example, I failed in my examination for the doctor's degree in medical jurisprudence; 
never once has the matter worried me in my dreams, while I have often enough been 
examined in botany, zoology, and chemistry, and I sat for the ex aminations in these 
subjects with well-justified anxiety, but escaped disaster, through the clemency of fate, 
or of the examiner. In my dreams of school examinations, I am always examined in history, 
a subject in which I passed brilliantly at the time, but only, I must admit, because my 
good-natured professor—my one-eyed bene factor in another dream—did not overlook the 
fact that on the examination-paper which I returned to him I had crossed out with my 
fingernail the second of three questions, as a hint that he. should not insist on it. One 
of my patients, who withdrew before the matriculation examination, only to pass it later, 
but
¹See also pp. 261-2.
failed in the officer's examination, so that he did not become an officer, tells me that 
he often dreams of the former examination, but never of the latter.
W. Stekel, who was the first to interpret the matriculation dream, maintains that this 
dream invariably refers to sexual experiences and sexual maturity. This has frequently; 
been confirmed in my experience.

VI. The Dream-Work
All other previous attempts to solve the problems of dreams have concerned themselves 
directly with the manifest dream-content as it is retained in the memory. They have 
sought to obtain an interpretation Of the dream from this content, or, if they dispensed 
with an interpretation, to base their conclusions concerning the dream on the evidence 
provided by this content. We, however, are confronted by a different set of data; for us 
a new psychic material interposes itself between the dream-content and the results of our 
investigations: the latent dream-content, or dream-thoughts, which are obtained only by 
our method. We develop the solution of the dream from this latent content, and hot from 
the manifest dream-content. We are thus confronted with a new problem, an entirely novel 
task—that of examining and tracing the relations between the latent dream thoughts and 
the manifest dream-content, and the processes by which the latter has grown out of the 
former.
The dream-thoughts and the dream-content present themselves as two descriptions of the 
same content in two different languages; or, to put it more clearly, the dream-content 
appears to us as a translation of the dream-thoughts into another mode of expression, 
whose symbols and laws of composition we must learn by comparing the origin with the 
translation. The dream-thoughts we can understand without further trouble the moment we 
have ascertained them. The dream-content is, as it were, presented in. hieroglyphics, 
whose symbols must be translated, one by one, into the language of the dream-thoughts. It 
would of course, be incorrect to attempt to read these symbols in accordance with their 
values as pictures, instead of in accordance with their meaning as symbols. For instance, 
I have before me a picture-puzzle (rebus)—a house, upon whose roof there is a boat; 
then a single letter; then a running figure, whose head has been omitted, and so on. As a 
critic I might be tempted to judge this composition and its elements to be nonsensical. A 
boat is out of place on the roof a house, and a headless man cannot run; the man, too, is 
larger than house, and if the whole thing is meant to represent a landscape the single 
letters of the alphabet have no right in it, since they do not occur in nature; A correct 
judgment of the picture-puzzle-is possible only if Imake no such objections, to the whole 
and its parts, and if, on the contrary, I take the trouble to replace each image by a 
syllable or word which it may represent, by virtue of some, allusion or relation. The 
words thus put together are no longer meaningless, but might constitute, the most 
beautiful and pregnant aphorism; Now a dream is such a: picture-puzzle, and-our 
predecessors in that art of dream-interpretation have made the mistake of judging the 
rebus as an, artistic composition. As such of course, it appears nonsensical and 
worthless.
A. Condensation
The first thing that becomes clear to the investigator when he compares the dream-content 
with the dream-thoughts is that a tremendous work of condensation has-been; accomplished. 
The dream is meagre, paltry and laconic in comparison with the ranged and copiousness of 
the dream-thoughts^ The dream, when written down, fills half a page; the analysis^ which 
contains the dream-thoughts; requires six, eight, twelve times as much space. The ratio 
varies with different dreams; but in my experience it is always of the same order. As a 
rule, the extent of the compression which has been accomplished' is under-estimated, 
owing to the fact that the dream-thoughts which have been brought to light are believed 
to be the whole of the material, whereas a continuation of the work of interpretation 
would reveal still: further thoughts hidden in the dream. We have already found it 
necessary to remark that one can never be really sure that one has interpreted a dream 
completely; even if the solution seems satisfying and flawless, it is always possible 
that yet another meaning has been manifested: by the same dream. Thus the degree of 
condensation's —strictly speaking-indeterminable, Exception may be taken—arid at 
first sight the objection seems perfectly plausible—to the assertion that the 
disproportion between dream-content and dream-thoughts justifies the conclusion that a 
considerable condensation of psychic material occurs in the formation of dreams. For we 
often have the feeling that we have been dreaming a great deal all night, and have then 
forgotten most of what we have dreamed. The dream which we remember on waking would thus 
appear to be merely a remnant of the total dreamwork, which would surely equal the 
dream-thought in range if only we could remember it completely. To a certain extent this 
is undoubtedly true; there is no getting away from the fact that a dream is most 
accurately reproduced if we try to remember it immediately after waking, and that the 
recollection of it becomes more and more defective as the day goes on. On the other hand, 
it has to be recognized that the impression that we have dreamed a good deal more than we 
are able to reproduce is very often based on an illusion, the origin of which we shall 
explain later on. Moreover, the assumption of a affected by the possibility of forgetting 
a part of dreams, for it may be demonstrated by the multitude of ideas pertaining to 
those parts of the dream-work do remain in the memory. If a large part of the dream has 
really escaped the memory, we are probably deprived of access to a pew series of 
dream-thought. We have no justification for expecting that those portions; of the dream 
which have been lost should likewise have referred only to those thoughts; which we know 
from the analysis of the portions which have been preserved.¹
In view of the very great number, of ideas which analysis elicits for each individual 
element of the dream-content, the principal doubt in the minds of many readers will be 
whether it is permissible to count everything that subsequently occurs to the mind during 
analysis as forming part pf the; dream—thought-in other words to assume that, all these 
thought have, been active in the sleeping state, and have taken part in the formation of 
the dream, Is, it not more probable that new combinations of thoughts are developed in 
the course of analysis, which did not participate in the; formation of the dream? To this 
objection I can give only a conditional reply. It is true, of, course, that separate 
combinations of thoughts make their first; appearance during the analysis;, but one can 
convince oneself every, time this happens that such new; combinations have been 
established only between thoughts which have already been connected in. other ways in the 
dream-thoughts; the new combinations, are, so to speak,, corollaries, short circuits, 
which are
¹References to the condensation in dreams are to be found in the works of many writers 
on the subject,  Du Prel states in his Philosophie der Mystik that he is absolutely 
certain that-a condensation-process of the succession of ideas had occurred.
made possible by the existence of other, more fundamental modes of connection. In respect 
of the great majority of the groups of thoughts revealed by analysis, we are obliged to 
admit that they have already been active in the formation of the dream, for if we work 
through a succession of such thoughts, which at first sight seem to have played no part 
in the formation of the dream, we suddenly come upon a thought which occurs in the 
dream-content, and is indispensable to its interpretation, but which is nevertheless in 
accessible except through this chain of thoughts. The reader may here turn to the dream 
of the botanical monograph, Which is obviously the result of astonishing degree of 
condensation, even though I have not given the complete analysis.
But how, then, are we to imagine the psychic condition of the sleeper which precedes 
dreaming? Do all the dream-thoughts exist side by side, or do they pursue one another, or 
are there several simultaneous trains of thought, proceeding from different centres, 
which subsequently meet? I do riot think it is necessary at this point to for in a 
plastic conception Of the psychic condition at the time of dream formation. But let us 
hot forget that we are concerned with unconscious thinking, and that the process may 
easily be different from that which we observe in ourselves in deliberate contemplation 
accompanied by consciousness.
The fact, however, is irrefutable that dream formation is based on a process of 
condensation. How, then, is this condensation effected?
Now, if we consider that of the dream thoughts ascertained only the most restricted 
number are represented in the dream by means of one of their conceptual elements, we 
might conclude that the condensation is accomplished by means of omission, inasmuch as 
the dream is not a faithful translation or projection, point by point, of the 
dream-thoughts, but a very incomplete and defective reproduction of them. This view, as 
we shall soon perceive, is a very inadequate one. But for the present let us take it as a 
point of departure, arid ask ourselves: If only a few of the elements of the dream 
thoughts make their way into the dream-content, what are the conditions that determine 
their selection?
In order to solve this problem, let us turn our attention to those elements of the 
dream-content which must have fulfilled the conditions for which we are looking. The most 
suitable material for this investigation will be a dream to whose formation a 
particularly intense condensation has contributed. I select the dream, cited on page 207, 
of the botanical monograph.
I
Dream-content: I have written a monograph upon a certain (indeterminate) species of 
plant. The book lies before me. I am just turning over a folded coloured plate. A dried 
specimen of the plant is bound up in this copy, as in a herbarium.
The most prominent element of this dream is the botanical monograph. This is derived from 
the impressions of the dream-day; I had actually seen a monograph on, the genus Cyclamen 
in a bookseller's window. The mention of this genus is lacking in the dream-content; only 
the monograph and its relation to botany have remained. The botanical mono graph 
immediately reveals its relation to the work on cocaine which I once wrote; from cocaine 
the train of thought proceeds on the one hand to a Festschrift, and on the other to my 
friend, the oculist, Dr. Koenigstein; who was partly responsible for the introduction of 
cocaine as a local anaesthetic. Moreover, Dr. Koenigstein is connected with the 
recollection of an interrupted conversation I had had with him on the previous evening," 
and with all sorts of ideas relating to the remuneration of medical and surgical services 
among colleagues. This conversation, then, is the actual dream-stimulus ; the monograph 
on cyclamen is also a real incident, but one of an indifferent nature; as I now see, the 
botanical monograph of the dream proves to be a common mean between the two experiences 
of the day, taken over unchanged from an indifferent impression, and bound up with the 
psychically significant experience by means of the most copious associations.
Not only the combined idea of the botanical monograph however, but also each of its 
separate elements, botanical and monograph penetrates farther and farther, by manifold 
associations, into the- confused tangle of the dream-thoughts. To botanical belong the 
recollections of the person of Professor Gartner (German: Gartner=gardener), of his 
blooming wife, of my patient, whose name is Flora and of a lady concerning whom I told 
the story of the forgotten flowers Gartner again, leads me to the laboratory and the 
conversation with Koenig stein; and the allusion to the two female patients belongs to 
the same conversation. From the lady with the flowers a train of thoughts branches off to 
the favourite flowers of my wife, whose other branch leads to the title of the hastily 
seen monograph. Further, botanical recalls an episode at the Gymnasium, and a university 
examination; and a fresh subject—that of my hobbies—which was broached in the 
abovementioned conversation, is linked up, by means of what is humorously called my 
favourite flower, the artichoke, with the train of thoughts proceeding from the forgotten 
flowers; behind artichoke there lies, on the one hand, a recollection of Italy, and on 
the other a reminiscence of a scene of my childhood, in which I first formed an 
acquaintance—which has since then grown so intimate—with books. Botanical, then is 
veritable nucleus, arid, for the dream, the meeting-point of many trains of thought; 
which, I can testify, had all really been brought into connection by the conversation 
referred to. Here we find ourselves in a thought-factory, in which, as in The Weaver's 
Masterpiece:
The little shuttles to and fro
Fly, and the threads unnoted flow;
One throw links up a thousand threads.
Monograph in the dream, again, touches two themes: the one-sided nature of my studies, 
and the costliness of my hobbies.
The impression derived from this first investigation is that the elements botanical and 
monograph were taken up into the dream-content because they were able to offer the most 
numerous points of contact with the greatest number of dream-thoughts, and thus 
represented nodal points at which a great number of the dream-thoughts met together, and 
because they were of manifold significance in respect of the meaning of the dream. The 
fact upon which this explanation is based may be expressed in another form: Every element 
of the dream-content proves to be over-determined—-that is, it appears several times 
over in the dream-thoughts.
We shall learn more if we examine the other components of the dream in respect of their 
occurrence in the dream thoughts. The coloured plate refers (cf. the analysis on p. 208) 
to a new subject, the criticism passed upon my work by colleagues, and also to a subject 
already represented in the dream—my hobbies—and, further, to a memory of my 
childhood, in which I pull to pieces a book with coloured plates; the dried specimen of 
the plant relates to my experience with the herbarium at the Gymnasium, and gives this 
memory particular emphasis. Thus I perceive the nature of the relation between the 
dream-content and dream thoughts: Not only are the elements of the dream determined 
several times over by the dream-thoughts, but the individual dream thoughts are 
represented in the dream by several elements. Starting from an element of the dream, the 
path of the association leads to a number of dream-thoughts; and from a single 
dream-thought to several elements of the dream. In the process of dream-formation, 
therefore, it is not the case that a single dream thought, or a group of dream-thoughts, 
supplies the dream-content with an abbreviation of itself as its representative, and that 
the next dream thought, supplies another abbreviation as its representative (much as 
representatives are elected from among the population); but rather that the whole mass of 
the dream-thoughts is subjected to a certain elaboration, in the course of which those 
elements that receive the strongest and completest support stand out in relief; so that 
the process might perhaps be likened to election by the scrutin du liste. Whatever dream 
I may subject to such a dissection, I always find the same fundamental principle 
confirmed—that the dream-elements have been formed out of the whole mass of the dream 
thoughts, and that every one of them appears, in relation to the dream thoughts, to have 
a multiple determination.
It is certainly not superfluous to demonstrate this relation of the dream-content to the 
dream thoughts by means of a further example, which is distinguished by a particularly 
artful intertwining of reciprocal relations. The dream is that of a patient whom I am 
treating for claustrophobia (fear of enclosed spaces).It will soon become evident why I 
feel myself called upon to entitle this exceptionally clever piece of dream-activity:
II. "A Beautiful Dream"
The dreamer is driving with a great number of companions in X-street, where there is a 
modest hostelry (which is not the case). A theatrical performance is being given in one 
of the room's of the inn. He is first spectator, then actor. Finally the company is told 
to change their clothes, in order to return to the city. Some of the company are shown 
into rooms on the ground floor, others to rooms on the first floor. Then a dispute 
arises. The people upstairs are annoyed because those downstairs have not yet finished 
changing, so that they cannot come down. His brother is upstairs; he is downstairs; and 
he is angry with his brother because they are so hurried. (This part obscure) Besides, it 
was already decided, upon their arrival, who was to go upstairs and who down. Then he 
goes alone up the hill towards the city, and he walks so heavily, and with such 
difficulty, that he cannot move from the spot. An elderly gentleman joins him and talks 
angrily of the King of Italy. Finally, towards the top of the hill, he is able to walk 
much more easily.
The difficulty experienced in climbing the hill was so distinct that for some time after 
waking he was in doubt whether the experience was a dream or the reality.
Judged by the manifest content, this dream can hardly be eulogized. Contrary to the 
rules, I shall begin the interpretation with that portion to which the dreamer referred 
as being the most distinct.
The difficulty dreamed of and probably experienced during the dream-difficulty in 
climbing, accompanied by dyspnoea-was one of the symptoms which the patient had actually 
exhibited some years before, and which, in conjunction with other symptoms, was at the 
time attributed to tuberculosis (probably hysterically simulated). From our study if 
exhibition-dreams we are already acquainted with this sensation of being inhibited in 
motion, peculiar to dreams, and here again we find it utilized as material always 
available for the purposes of any ither kind of representation. The part of the 
dream-content which represents climbing as difficult at first, and easier at the top of 
the hill, made me think, while it was being related, of the well-known masterly 
introduction to Daudet’s Sappho, Here a young man carries the woman he loves upstairs; 
she is at first as light as a feather, but the higher he climbs the more she weighs;, and 
this scene is symbolic of the progress of their relation, in describing which Daudet 
seeks to admonish young, men not to lavish an earnest affection upon 'girls of humble 
origin and dubious antes cedents.¹ Although I knew that my patient had recently had a 
love-affair with ah actress, and had broken It off, I hardly expected to find that the 
interpretation which had occurred to me was correct. The situation in Sappho is actually 
the reverse of that in the dream for in the dream climbing first and easy later on; in 
the novel the symbolism is
¹In estimating the significance 'of this passage we may recall the meaning of dreams of 
climbing stairs; as explained in the chapter on Symbolism.

Pertinent only if what was at first easily carried finally proves to be a heavy burden. 
To my astonishment, the patient remarked that the interpretation fitted in very well with 
the plot of a play which he had seen the previous evening. The play was called Rund um 
Wien (Round about Vienna), and treated of the career of a girl who was at first 
respectable, but who subsequently lapsed into the demimonde, and formed relations with 
highly-placed lovers, thereby climbing, but finally she went downhill faster and faster. 
This play reminded him of another, entitled Von Stufe zu Stufe (From Step to Step), the 
poster advertising which had depicted a flight of stairs.
To continue the interpretation. The actress with whom he had had his most recent and 
complicated affair had lived in X-street. There is no inn in this street. However, while 
he was spending part of the summer in Vienna for the sake of this lady, he had lodged 
(German: abgestiegen=stopped, literally stepped off) at a small hotel in the 
neighbourhood. When he was leaving the hotel, he said to the cab-driver: “I am glad at 
all events that I didn’t get any vermin here!” (Incidentally, the dread of vermin is 
one of his phobias.) whereupon the cab-driver answered: “How could anybody stop there! 
that isn’t a hotel at all, it’s really nothing but a pub!”
The pub immediately reminded him of a quotation:
Of a wonderful host
I was lately a guest.
But the host in the poem by Uhland is an apple-tree. Now a second quotation continues the 
train of thought:
Faust (dancing with the young witch)
A lovely dream once came to me;
I then beheld an apple-tree,
And there two fairest apples shone:
They lured me so, I climbed thereon.
THE FAIR ONE
Apples have been desired by you,
Since first in Paradise they grew;
And I am moved with joy to know
That such within my garden grow.²
There is not the slightest doubt what is meant by the apple-tree and the apples. A 
beautiful bosom stood high among the charms by which the actress had bewitched our 
dreamer.
Judging from the context of the analysis, we had every reason to assume that the dream
²Faust I, 4128-35.

referred to an impression of the dreamer's childhood. If this is correct, it must have 
referred to the wet-nurse of the dreamer, who is now a man of nearly thirty years of age. 
The bosom of the nurse is in reality an inn for the child. The nurse, as well as Daudet's 
Sappho, appears as an allusion to his recently abandoned mistress.
The (elder) brother of the patient also appears in the dream-content; he is upstairs, 
while the dreamer himself is downstairs. This again is an inversion, for the brother, as 
I happen to know, has lost his social position, while my patient has retained his. In 
relating the dream-content, the dreamer avoided saying that his brother was upstairs and 
that he himself was downstairs. This would have been to obvious an expression, for in 
Austria we say that a man is on the ground floor when he has lost his fortune and social 
position, just as we say that he has comedown. Now the fact that at this point in the 
dream something is represented as inverted must have a meaning; and the inversion must 
apply to some other relation between the dream-thoughts and the dream-content. There is 
an indication which suggests how this inversion is to be understood. It obviously applies 
to the end of the dream, where the circumstances of climbing are the reverse of those 
described in Sappho. Now it is evident what inversion is meant: In Sappho the man carries 
the woman who stands in a sexual relation to him; in the dream-thoughts, conversely, 
there is a reference to a woman carrying a man; and, as this could occur only in 
childhood, the reference is once more to the nurse who carries the heavy child. Thus the 
final portion of the dream succeeds in representing Sappho and the nurse in the same 
allusion.
Just as the name Sappho has not been selected by the poet without reference to a Lesbian 
practise, so the portions of the dream in which people are busy upstairs and downstairs, 
above and beneath, point to fancies of a sexual content with which the dreamer is 
occupied, and which, as suppressed cravings, are not unconnected with his neurosis. 
Dream-interpretation itself does not show that these are fancies and not memories of 
actual happenings; it only furnishes us with a set of thoughts and leaves it to us to 
determine their actual value. In this case real and imagined happenings appear at first 
as of equal value—and not only here, but also in the creation of more important psychic 
structures than dreams. A large company, as we already know, signifies a secret. The 
brother is none other than a representative; drawn into the scenes of childhood by 
fancying backwards, of all of the subsequent rivals for women's favours. Through the 
medium of an experience indifferent in itself^ the episode of the gentleman who talks 
angrily of the King of Italy refers to the intrusion of people of low rank into 
aristocratic society. It is as though the warning which Daudet gives to young men were to 
be supplemented by a similar warning; applicable to a suckling child.¹ 
In the two dreams here cited I have shown by italics where one of the elements of the; 
dream recurs in the dream-thoughts,, in order to make the multiple relations of the 
former more obvious. Since, however, the analysis of these dreams has not been carried to 
completion, it will probably be worth while to consider a dream with a full analysis, in 
order to demonstrate the manifold determination of the dream-content. For this purpose I 
shall select the dream of Irma's injection (see p. 183). From this example we shall 
readily see that the condensation-work in the dream-formation has made use of more means 
than one.
The chief person in the dream-content is my patient Irma, who is seen with the features 
which belong to her waking life, and who therefore, in the first instance, represents 
herself. But her attitude, as I examine her at the window, is taken from a recollection 
of another person, of the lady for whom I should like to exchange my patient, as is shown 
by the dream-thoughts. Inasmuch as Irma has a diphtheritic membrane, which recalls my 
anxiety about my eldest daughter, she comes to represent this child of mine, behind whom, 
connected with, her by the identity of their names, is concealed the person of the 
patient who died from the effects of poison. In the further course of the dream the 
significance of Irma's personality changes (without the alteration of her image as it is 
seen in the dream): she becomes one of the children whom we examine in the public 
dispensaries for children's diseases, where my friends display the differences in their 
mental capacities. The transition was obviously effected by the idea of my little 
daughter. Owing to her unwillingness to open her mouth, the same Irma constitutes an 
allusion to another
¹The fantastic nature of the situation relating to the dreamer's wet-nurse is shown by 
the circumstance, objectively ascertained, that the nurse in this case was his mother. 
Further, I may call attention to the regret of the young man in the anecdote related on 
p. 222 above (that he had not taken better advantage of his opportunities with his 
wet-nurse) as the probable source of his dream.
lady who was examined by me, and, the same connection, to my wife. Further, in the morbid 
changes which I discover in her throat I have summarized allusions to quite a number of 
other persons.
All these people whom I encounter as I follow up the associations suggested by Irma do 
not appear personally in the dream; they are concealed behind the dream-person Irma, who 
is thus developed into a collective image, which, as might be expected, has contradictory 
features. Irma comes to represent these other persons, who are discarded in the work of 
condensation, inasmuch as I allow anything to happen to her which reminds me of these 
persons, trait by trait.
For the purposes of dream-condensation I may construct a composite person in yet an other 
fashion, by combining the actual features of two or more persons in a single dream-image. 
It is in this fashion that the Dr. M of my dream was constructed; he bears the name of 
Dr. M, and he speaks and acts as Dr. M does, but his bodily characteristics and his 
malady belong to another person, my eldest brother; a single feature, paleness, is doubly 
determined, owing to the fact that it is common to both persons. Dr. R, in my dream about 
my uncle, is a similar composite person. But here the dream-image is constructed in yet 
another fashion. I have not united features peculiar to the one person with the features 
of the other, thereby abridging by certain features the memory-picture of each; but I 
have adopted the method employed by Galton in producing family portraits; namely, I have 
superimposed the two images, so that the common features stand out in stronger relief, 
while those which do not coincide neutralize one another and become indistinct. In the 
dream of my uncle the fair beard stands out in relief, as an emphasized feature, from a 
physiognomy which belongs to two persons, and which is consequently blurred; further, in 
its reference to growing grey the beard contains an allusion to my father and to myself.
The construction of collective and composite persons is one of the principal methods of 
dream-condensation. We shall presently have occasion to deal with this in another 
connection. 
The notion of dysentery in the dream of Irma's injection has likewise a multiple 
determination; on the one hand, because of its paraphasic assonance with diphtheria, and 
on the other because of its reference to the patient whom I sent to the East, and whose 
hysteria had been wrongly diagnosed.
The mention of propyls in the dream proves again to be an interesting case of 
condensation. Not propyls hut amyls were included in the dream-thoughts. One might think 
that here a simple displacement had occured in the course of dream-formation. This is in 
fact the case, but the displacement serves the purposes of the condensation, as is shown 
from the following supplementary-analysis: If I dwell for a moment upon the word propylen 
(German) its as sonance with the word propylaeum suggests it self to me. But a propylaeum 
is to be found not only in Athens, but also in Munich. In the latter city, a year before 
my dream, I had visited a friend who was seriously ill, and the reference to him in 
trimethylamin, which follows closely upon propyls, is unmistakable.
I pass over the striking circumstance that here, as elsewhere in the analysis of dreams, 
associations of the most widely differing values are employed for. making 
thought-connections as though they were equivalent, and I yield to the temptation to 
regard the procedure by which amyls in the dream-thoughts are replaced in the 
dream-content by propyls as a sort of plastic process.
On the one hand, here is the group of ideas relating to my friend Otto, who does not 
understand me, thinks I am in the wrong, and gives me the liqueur that smells of amyls; 
on the other hand, there is the group of ideas connected with the first by 
contrast—relating to my Berlin friend who does understand me, who would always think 
that I was right, and to whom I am indebted for so much valuable in formation concerning 
the chemistry of sexual processes.
What elements in the Otto group are to attract my particular attention are determined by 
the recent circumstances which are responsible for the dream; amyls belong to the element 
so distinguished, which are predestined to find their way into the dream-content. The 
large group of ideas centering upon William is actually stimulated by the contrast 
between William and Otto, and those elements in it are emphasized which are in tune with 
those already stirred up in the Otto group. In the whole of this dream I am continually 
recoiling from somebody who excites my displeasure towards another person with whom I can 
at will confront the first; trait by trait I appeal to the friend as against the enemy. 
Thus amyls in the Otto group awakes recollections in the other group, also belonging to 
the region of chemistry; trimethylamin, which receives support from several quarters, 
finds its way into the dream-content. Amyls, too, might have got into the dream-content 
Unchanged, but it yields to the influence of the William group, inasmuch as out of the 
whole range of recollections covered by this name an element is sought out which is able 
to furnish a double determination for amyls. Propyls is closely associated with amyls; 
from the William group comes Munich with its propylaeum. Both groups are united in 
propyls—propylaeum. As though by a compromise, this intermediate element then makes its 
way into the dream-content. Here a common mean which permits of a multiple determination 
has been created. It thus becomes palpable that a multiple determination must facilitate 
penetration into the dream-content. For the purpose of this mean-formation a displacement 
of the attention has been unhesitatingly effected from what is really intended to 
something adjacent to it in the associations.
The study of the dream of Irma's injection has now enabled us to obtain some insight into 
the process of condensation which occurs in the formation of dreams. We perceive, as 
peculiarities of the condensing process, a selection of those elements which occur 
several times over in the dream-content, the formation of new unities (composite persons, 
mixed images), and the production of common means. The purpose which is served by 
condensation, and the means by which it is brought about, will be investigated when we 
come to study in all their bearings the psychic processes at work in the formation of 
dreams. Let us for the present be content with establishing the fact of dream 
condensation as a relation between the dream thoughts and the dream-content which 
deserves attention.
The condensation-work of dreams becomes most palpable when it takes words and means as 
its objects. Generally speaking, words are often treated in dreams as things, and 
therefore undergo the same combinations as the ideas of. things. The results of such 
dreams are comical and bizarre word-formations.
1. A colleague sent an essay of his, in which he had, in my opinion, overestimated the 
value of a recent physiological discovery, and had expressed himself, moreover, in 
extravagant terms. On the following night I dreamed a sentence which obviously referred 
to this essay: "That is a truly norekdal style." The solution of this word-formation at 
first gave me some difficulty; it was unquestionably formed as a parody of the 
superlatives colossal, pyramidal; but it was not easy to say where it came "from. At last 
the monster fell apart into the two names Nora and Ekdal, from two well-known plays by 
Ibsen. I had previously read a newspaper article on Ibsen by the writer whose latest work 
I was now criticizing in my dream.
2. One of my female patients dreams that a man with a fair beard and a peculiar 
glittering eye is pointing to a signboard, attached to a tree which reads: 
uclamparia—wet.¹
Analysis.—The man was- rather authoritative-looking, and his peculiar glittering eye at 
once recalled the church of San Paolo, near Rome, where she had seen the mosaic portraits 
of the Popes. One of the early Popes had a golden eye (this is really an optical 
illusion, to which the guides usually call attention). Further associations showed that 
the general physiognomy of the man corresponded with her own clergyman (pope), and the 
shape of the fair beard recalled her doctor (myself), while the stature of the man in the 
dream recalled her father. All these persons stand in the same relation to her; they are 
all guiding and directing the course of her life. On further questioning, the golden eye 
recalled gold^-money—the rather expensive psycho-analytic treatment, which gives her a 
great deal of concern. Gold, moreover, recalls the gold cure for alcoholism -—Herr D, 
whom she would have married, if it had not been for his clinging to the disgusting 
alcohol habit-—she does not object to anyone's taking an occasional drink; she herself 
sometimes_ drinks beer and liqueurs. This again brings her back to her visit to San Paolo 
(fuorila mura) and its surroundings. She remembers that in the neighbouring monastery of 
the Tre Fontane she drank a liqueur made of eucalyptus by the Trappist monks of the 
monastery. She then relates how the monks transformed this malarial and swampy region 
into a dry and wholesome neighbourhood by planting numbers of eucalyptus trees. The word 
uclamparia then resolves itself into eucalyptus and malaria, and the word wet refers to 
the former swampy nature of the locality. Wet also suggests dry. Dry is actually the name 
of the man whom she would have married but for his over-indulgence in alcohol. The 
peculiar name of Dry is of Germanic origin (drei—three) and hence, alludes to the 
monastery of the Three (drei) Fountains. In talking of Mr. Dry's habit she used the 
strong expression: "He could drink a
¹Given by translator, as the author's example could not be translated.
fountain." Mr. Dry jocosely refers to his habit by saying: "You know I must drink because 
I am always dry'' (referring to his name). The eucalyptus refers also to her neurosis, 
which was at first diagnosed as malaria. She went to Italy because her attacks of 
anxiety, which were accompanied by marked rigors and shivering, were thought to be of 
malarial origin. She bought some eucalyptus oil from the monks, and she maintains that it 
has done her much good.
The condensation uclamparia—-wet is, there fore, the point of junction for the dream as 
well as for the neurosis.
3. In a rather long and confused dream of my own, the apparent nucleus of which is a sear 
voyage, it occurs to me that the next port is Hearsing, and next after that Fliess. The 
latter is the name of my friend in B, to which city I have often journeyed. But Hearsing 
is put together from the names of the places in the neighbourhood of Vienna, which so 
frequently end in "ing": Hietzing, Liesing, Moedling (the old Medelitz, meae deliciae,my 
joy; that is, my own name, the German for joy being Freude), and the English hearsay, 
which points to calumrny, and establishes the relation to the indifferent dream-stimulus 
of the day—a poem in Fliegende Blatter about a slanderous dwarf, Sagter Hatergesagt 
(Saidhe Hashesaid). By the combination of the final syllable ing with the name Fliess, 
Viissingen is obtained, which is a real port through which my brother passes when he 
comes to visit us from England. But the English for Viissingen is Flushing, which 
signifies blushing, and recalls patients suffering from erythmphobid (fear of blushing), 
whom I sometimes treat, and also a recent publication of Bechterew's, ^relating' to this 
neurosis, the reading of which angered me.¹
¹The same analysis and synthesis of syllables—a veritable chemistry of 
syllables:—serves us for many a jest in waking life. "What is the cheapest method of 
obtaining silver? You go to a field where silverberries are growing: and, pick them; then 
the berries are eliminated and the silver remains in a free state." [Translator's 
example]'. The first person who read and criticized this book made the objection—with 
which other readers will probably agree—that "the dreamer often appears too witty." 
That is true, so long as it applies to the dreamer; it involves a condemnation only when 
its application is extended to the interpreter of the dream. In waking reality I can 
"make very little claims to the predicate witty; if my dreams appear witty, this is not 
the. fault of my. individuality, but of the peculiar psychological conditions under which 
the dream is fabricated, and is intimately connected with the theory of wit and the 
comical. The dream becomes "witty because the shortest and most direct way to the 
expression of its thoughts is barred for it; the dream is under constraint. My readers 
may convince: themselves that the dreams of my patients give the impression of being 
quite as witty (at least, in intention), as my own, and even more so. Nevertheless, this 
reproach impelled me to compare the technique of. wit with the dream-work.
4. Upon another occasion I had a dream which consisted of two separate parts. The first 
was the vividly remembered word Autodidasker: the second was a faithful reproduction in 
the dream-content of a short and harmless fancy which had been developed a few days 
earlier, and which was to the effect that. I must tell Professor N, when I next saw him: 
"The patient about whose condition I last consulted you is really suffering from "a 
neurosis, just as you suspected." So not only must the newlycoined Autodidasker satisfy 
the requirement that it should contain or represent a com pressed meaning, but this 
meaning must have a valid connection with my resolve—repeated from waking fife—to 
give Professor N due credit for his diagnosis.
Now Autodidasker is easily separated into author (German, Autor), autodidact, and Lasker, 
with whom is associated the name Lasalle. The first of these words leads to the occasion 
of the dream—which this time is significant. I had brought home to my wife several 
volumes by a well-known author who is a friend of my brother's, and who, as I have 
learned, comes from the same neighbourhood as myself (J. J. David). One evening; she told 
me how profoundly impressed she had been by the pathetic sadness of a story in one of 
David's hovels (a story of wasted talents), and our conversation turned upon the signs of 
talent which we perceive in our own children; Under the influence of what she had just 
read, my wife expressed some concern about our children, and I comforted her with the 
remark that precisely such dangers as she feared can be averted by training. During the 
night my thoughts proceeded farther, took up my wife's concern for the children, and 
interwove with it all sorts of other things. Something which the novelist had said to my 
brother on the subject of marriage showed my thoughts a by-path which might lead to 
representation in the dream. This path led to Breslau; a lady who was a very good friend 
of ours had married and gone to live there. I found in Breslau Lasker and. Lasalle, two 
examples to justify the fear lest our hoys should be ruined by women, examples which 
enabled me to represent simultaneously two ways of ^influencing a man to his undoing.² 
The
²Lasker died of progressive paralysis; that is, of the consequences of an infection 
caught from a woman (syphilis); Lasalle, also a syphilitic, was killed in a duel which he 
fought on account of the lady whom he had been courting.
Cherchez la femme, by which these thoughts may be summarized,; leads me, if taken in an 
other sense, to; my brother> who is still unmarried and whose name is Alexander. Now, I 
see that Alex, as we abbreviate the name, sounds almost like an inversion of Lasker,arid: 
that this fact must have contributed to send my thoughts on a detour by way of Breslau. 
But the playing with names and syllables in which I am here engaged has yet another 
meaning. It represents the wish that my brother may. enjoy a happy family life, and this 
in the following manner: In the novel of artistic life, L'GLuvre, which, by virtue of its 
content, must have been in association with my dream thoughts, the author, as is 
well-known, has incidentally given a description of his own person and his own domestic 
happiness, and appears under the name of Sandoz. In the meta morphosis of his name he 
probably went to work as follows: Zola, when inverted (as children are fond of inverting 
names) gives Aloz. But this was still too undisguised; he therefore replaced the syllable 
AI, which stands at the beginning of the name Alexander, by the third syllable of the 
same name, sand, and thus arrived at Sandoz. My autodidasker originated in a similar 
fashion. 
My phantasy—that I am telling Professor N that the patient whom we have both seen is 
suffering from a neurosis—found its Way into the dream in the following manner: Shortly 
before the close of my working year, I had a patient in whose case my powers of diagnosis 
failed me. A serious organic trouble-^-possibly some alterative degeneration of the 
spinal cord- was to be assumed, but could not be conclusively demonstrated. It would have 
been tempting to diagnose the trouble as a neurosis, and this would have put an end to 
all my difficulties, but for the fact that the sexual anamnesis, failing which I am 
unwilling to admit a neurosis, was so energetically denied by the patient. In ray 
embarrassment I called to my assistance the physician Whom I respect most of all men (as 
others do also), and to whose authority I surrender most completely. He listened to my 
doubts, told me he thought them justified, and then said: "Keep on observing the man, it 
is probably a neurosis." Since I know that he does not share my opinions concerning the 
aetiology of the neuroses, I refrained from contradicting him, but I did not conceal my 
scepticism. A few days later I informed the patient that I did not know what to do with 
him; and advised him to go to someone else. Thereupon, to my great astonishment, he began 
to beg my pardon for having lied to me; he- had felt so ashamed; and now he revealed to 
me just that piece of sexual aetiology which I had expected, and which I-found necessary 
for assuming the existence of a neurosis. This was relief to me, but at the same time a 
humiliation; for: I had to admit that my consultant, who was not disconcerted by the 
absence of anamnesis, had judged the case more correctly. I made up my mind to tell him, 
when next I saw him, that he had been right and I had been wrong.
This is just what I do in the dream. But what sort of a wish is fulfilled if I 
acknowledge that I am mistaken? This is precisely my wish; I wish to be mistaken as 
regards my fears—that is to say, I wish that my wife, whose fears I have appropriated 
in my dream thoughts; may prove to be mistaken. The subject to which the fact of being 
right or wrong is related in the dream is not far removed from that which is; really of 
interest to the dream thoughts. We have the same pair of alternatives, of either organic 
or functional impairment caused by a woman, or actually by the sexual life—either 
tabetic paralysis or a neurosis—with which latter the nature of Lasalles undoing is 
indirectly connected.
In this well-constructed (and on careful analysis quite transparent) dream, Professor N 
ap pears not merely on account of this analogy, and my wish to be proved mistaken, or the 
associated references to Breslau and to the family of our married friend who lives there; 
but also on account of the following little dialogue Which followed bur consultation: 
After he had acquitted himself of his professional duties by making the above-mentioned 
suggestion, Dr. N proceeded to discuss personal matters. "How many children have you 
now?"—"Six." —A thoughtful and respectful gesture.—"Girls, boys?"—"Three of each. 
They are my pride and my riches."—"Well, you must be careful; there is no difficulty 
about the girls, but the boys are a difficulty later on as regards their upbringing." I 
replied that until now they had been very tractable; obviously this prognosis of my boys' 
future pleased me as little as his diagnosis of my patient, whom he believed to be 
suffering only from a neurosis. These two impressions, then, are connected by their 
contiguity; by their being successively received; and when I incorporate the story of the 
neurosis into the dream,. I substitute it for the conversation: on the subject of 
upbringing- which is even more closely connected with the dream thoughts; since it 
touches so closely upon the anxiety subsequently expressed by my wife. Thus, even my fear 
that N may prove to be tight in his remarks on the difficulties to be met with in 
bringing up boys is admitted into the dream-content, inasmuch as it is concealed behind 
the representation of my wish that I may be wrong to harbour such apprehensions The same 
phantasy serves without alteration to represent both the conflicting alternatives.
Examination-dreams present the same difficulties to interpretation that I have already 
described as characteristic of most typical dreams. The associative material which the 
dreamer supplies only rarely suffices for interpretation. A deeper understanding of such 
dreams has to be accumulated from a considerable number of examples. Not long ago I 
arrived at a conviction that reassurances like "But you already are a doctor," and so on, 
not only convey a consolation but imply a reproach as well. This would have run: "You are 
already so old, so-far advanced in. life, and yet you still commit such follies, are 
guilty of such criticism and consolation would correspond with the examination-dreams. 
After this it is no longer surprising that the reproaches in the last analysed examples 
concerning follies and childish behaviour should relate to repetitions of reprehensible 
sexual acts.
The verbal transformations in dreams are very similar to those which are known to occur 
in paranoia, and which are observed also in hysteria and obsessions. The linguistic 
tricks of children, who at a certain age actually treat words as objects, and even invent 
new languages and artificial syntaxes, are a common source, of such occurrences both in 
dreams and in the psychoneuroses.
The analysis of nonsensical word-formations in dreams is particularly well suited to 
demonstrate the degree of condensation effected in the dream-work. From the small number 
of the selected examples here considered it must not be concluded that such material is 
seldom observed or is at all exceptional. It is, on the contrary, very frequent, but, 
owing to the dependence of dream interpretation on psycho analytic treatment, very few 
examples are noted down and reported, and most of the analyses which are reported are 
comprehensible only to the specialist in neuropathology.
When a spoken utterance, expressly distinguished as such from a thought, occurs in a 
dreamy itis~ an invariable rule that the dreams speech has originated from a remembered 
speech in the dream-material. The wording of the speech has either been preserved in its 
entirety or has been slightly altered in expression; frequently the dream-speech is 
pieced to gether from different recollections of spoken remarks; the wording has remained 
the same, but the sense has perhaps become ambiguous, or differs from the wording. Not 
infrequently the dream-speech serves merely as an allusion to an incident in connection 
with which the remembered speech was made.¹
B. The Work of Displacement
Another and probably no less significant relation must have already forced itself upon 
our attention while we were collecting examples of dream-condensation. We may have 
noticed that these elements which obtrude themselves in the dream-content as its 
essential components do not by any means play this same part in the dream-thoughts. As a 
corollary to this the converse of this statement is also true. That which is obviously 
the essential content of the dream-thoughts need not be represented at all in the dream. 
The dream is, as it were, centred elsewhere; its content is arranged about elements which 
do not constitute the central point of the dream-thoughts. Thus, for example, in the 
dream of the botanical monograph the central point of the dream-content is evidently the 
element botanical; in the dream-thoughts, we are concerned with the complications and 
conflicts resulting from services rendered between colleagues which place them under 
mutual obligations ; later on with the reproach that I am in the habit of sacrificing too 
much time to my hobbies; and the element botanical finds no place in this nucleus of the 
dream-thoughts, unless it is loosely connected with it by antithesis, for botany was 
never among my favourite subjects. In the Sappho-dream of my patient, ascending and 
descending, being upstairs and down, is made- the central-point; the dream, however, is 
concerned with the danger of sexual relations with persons of low degree; so that only 
one of the elements of the dream-
¹In the case of a young man who was suffering from obsessions, but whose intellectual 
functions were in tact and highly developed, I recently found the only exception to this 
rule. The speeches which occurred in his dreams did not originate in speeches which he 
had heard or had made himself, but corresponded to the undistorted verbal expression of 
his obsessive thoughts, which came to his waking consciousness only in an altered form.
thoughts seems to have found its way into the dream-content, and this is unduly expanded. 
Again, in the dream of my uncle, the fair beard which seems to be its central point, 
appears to have no rational connection with the desire for greatness which we have 
recognized as the nucleus of the dream-thoughts. Such dreams very naturally give us an 
impression of a displacement. In complete contrast to these examples, the dream of Irma's 
injection shows that individual elements may claim the same place in dream-formation as 
that' which they occupy in the dream-thoughts. The recognition of this new and utterly 
inconstant relation between the dream-thoughts and the dream content will probably 
astonish us at first. If we find, in a psychic process of normal life, that one idea has 
been selected from among a number of other, and has acquired a particular emphasis in our 
consciousness, we are wont to regard this as proof that a peculiar psychic value (a 
certain degree of interest) attaches to the victorious idea. We now discover that this 
value of the individual element in the dream-thoughts is not retained in dream-formation, 
or is not taken into account. For there is no doubt which of the elements of the 
dream-thoughts are of the highest value; our judgment informs us immediately. In 
dream-formation the essential elements, those that are emphasized by in tensive interest, 
may be treated as though they were subordinate, while they are replaced in the dream by 
other elements, which were certainly subordinate in the dream-thoughts. It seems at first 
as though the psychic intensity¹ of individual ideas were of no account in their 
selection for dream-formation, but only their greater or lesser multiplicity of 
determination. One might be inclined to think that what gets into the dream is not what 
is important in the dream-thoughts, but what is contained in them several times over; but 
our understanding of dream-formation is not much advanced by this assumption; to begin 
with, we cannot believe that the two motives of multiple determination and intrinsic 
value can influence the selection of the dream otherwise than in the same direction. 
Those ideas in the dream-thoughts which are most important are probably also those which 
recur most frequently, since the individual dream-thoughts radiate from them as centres. 
And yet the dream may reject these intensely emphasized and extensively reinforced
¹The psychic intensity or value of an idea—the emphasis due to interest—is of course 
to be distinguished from perceptual or conceptual intensity.
elements, and may take up into its content other elements which are only extensively 
reinforced. 
This difficulty may be solved if we follow up yet another impression received during the 
investigation of the over-determination of the dream-content. Many readers of this 
investigation may already have decided, in their own minds, that the discovery of the 
multiple determination of the dream-elements is of no great importance, because it is 
inevitable. Since in analysis we proceed from the dream-elements, and register all the 
ideas which associate themselves with these elements is it any wonder that these elements 
should recur with peculiar frequency in the thought-material obtained in this manner? 
While I cannot admit the validity of this objection, I am now going to say something that 
sounds rather like it: Among the thoughts which analysis brings to light are many which 
are far removed from the nucleus of the dream, arid which stand out like artificial 
interpolations made for a definite purpose. Their purpose may readily be detected; they 
establish a connection, often a forced and far-fetched connection, between the 
dream-content and the dream-thoughts, and in many cases, if these elements were weeded 
out of the analysis, the components of the dream-content would riot only not be 
over-determined, but they would not be sufficiently determined- We are thus led to the 
conclusion that multiple determination, decisive as regards the selection made by the 
dream, is perhaps not always a primary factor in dream-formation, but is often a 
secondary product of a psychic force which is as yet unknown to us. Nevertheless, it must 
be of importance for the entrance of the individual elements into the dream, for we may 
observe that, in cases where multiple determination does not proceed easily from the 
dream material, it is brought about with a certain effort.
It now becomes very probable that a psychic force expresses itself in the dream-work 
which, on the one hand, strips the elements of the high psychic value of their intensity 
and, on the other hand, by means of over-determination, creates new significant values 
from elements of slight value, which new values then make their way into the 
dream-content. Now if this is the method of procedure, there has occurred in the process 
of dream-formation a transference and displacement of the psychic intensities of the 
individual elements, from which results the textual difference between the process which 
we, here assume to be, operative is actually the most essential part of the dreamwork; it 
may fitly, be called dream-displacement. Dream-displacement and dream-condensation are 
the, two craftsmen to whom we may chiefly, ascribe the structure of the dream.  
I think it will be easy to recognize the psychic force which expresses itself in 
dream-displacement. The result of this displacement is that the dream-content no longer 
has any likeness to the nucleus of the dream-thoughts, and the dream reproduces only a 
distorted, form of the dream-wish in the unconscious. But we are already acquainted .with 
dream-distortion; we have traced it back to the censorship which one psychic instance in 
the psychic life exercises over another, Dream-displacement is one of the chief means of 
achieving this distortion. Is fecit, cui pro fuit.¹ We must assume that 
Dream-displacement is brought about by the influence of this censorship, the endopsychic 
defence.²
The manner in which the factors pi displacement, condensation and over-determination in-
¹“The doer gained."
²Since I Regard the attribution of dream-distortion to the censorship as the central 
point of my conception of the dream, I Will here quote the closing passage of a story, 
Traumen wie Wachen from Phantasien eines, Realisten by Lynkeus (Vienna  second edition 
[1900]) in which  I find, this chief feature of my doctrine reproduced:
"Concerning  a man who possesses the remarkable faculty of never dreaming nonsense. ..."
"Your marvellous faculty of dreaming as if you were awake is based upon  your virtues, 
upon your goodness, your justice, and your love of truth; it is the moral clarity of your 
nature which makes everything about you intelligible to me."
"But if I really, give thought to the matter," was the reply, "I almost believe that all 
men are made as I am, arid that no one ever dreams nonsense! A dream which one remembers 
so distinctly that one can relate it afterwards, and which, therefore, is no dream of 
delirium, always has a meaning; why, it cannot be otherwise! For that which is in 
contradiction, to itself can never be combined, into a. whole. The fact that time and 
space are often thoroughly shaken up, de tracts not at all from the real content of the 
dream, because both are without any significance, whatever for its essential content. We 
often. do' the same thing in waking life; think of fairy-tales, of so many bold and 
pregnant creations of fantasy, of which only a foolish person would say: 'That is' 
nonsense! For it isn't possible?"
“If only it were always possible to interpret dreams correctly, as you have just done 
with, mine!" said, the friend.
“That is certainly not an easy task, but with a little attention it must always be 
possible to the dreamer. You ask why it is generally impossible? In your case there seems 
to be something veiled in your dreams, something unchaste in. a special and exalted 
fashion, a certain secrecy in your nature, which it is difficult to fathom; and that is 
why your dreams so often seem to. be without, meaning, Or even nonsensical. But in the 
profoundest sense, this is by no means ' the case; indeed it cannot be, for a man is 
always the same person, whether he wakes or dreams."

teract with one another in dream-formation- which is the ruling factor and which the 
subordinate one-all this will be reserved as a subject for later investigation. In the 
meantime, we may state, as a second condition which, the elements -that find their, way 
into the dream must satisfy, that they must be withdrawn from; the resistance 0} the 
censorship. But henceforth, in the interpretation of dreams, we shall reckon with 
dream-displacement as an unquestionable fact.
C. The Means of Representation in Dreams
Besides the two factors of condensation and displacement in dreams,, which we have found 
to be at work in the transformation of the latent dream--material into the, ,.manifest 
dream-content, we shall, in the course of this investigation, come upon two further 
conditions which exercise an unquestionable influence, over; the selection of the 
material that eventually appears in. the dream. But first, even at the risk of seeming 
to. interrupt our progress, I shall take a preliminary:=glance rat the processes by which 
the interpretation of dreams is accomplished, I do not deny that the best way of 
explaining them, and of convincing, the critic of their reliability, would, be to take a. 
single dream as an example, to detail its interpretation, as I did (in Chapter II) in the 
case of the dream, of Irma's injection, but then to assemble the dream-thoughts which I 
had discovered, and from them to reconstruct the formation of the dream—-that is to 
say, to supplement dreams-analysis by dream-synthesis. I have done this with several 
specimens for my own instruction; but I cannot undertake to do it, here, as, I am 
prevented by a number of considerations (relating to the psychic material necessary for 
such a demonstration) such as any right-thinking person would approve. In the analysis of 
dreams these considerations present-less difficulty, for an analysis may be incomplete 
and still retain its value, even if it leads only a little way into the structure of the 
dream. I do, not see how a synthesis, to be convincing, could be anything short of 
complete. I could give a complete synthesis only of the dreams of such persons as are 
unknown to the reading public. Since, however, neurotic patients are the only, persons 
who furnish me with; the means of making such a synthesis, this part of the description 
of dreams must be postponed until I can carry the psychological explanation of the 
neuroses far enough to demonstrate their relation to our subject.1 This will be done else 
where.
From my attempts to construct dreams syn thetically from their dream-thoughts, I know 
that the material which is yielded by interpretation varies in value. Part of it consists 
of the: essential dream-thoughts, which would completely replace the dream and would in 
themselves be a sufficient substitute for it, were there no dream-censorship. To the 
other part, one is wont to ascribe slight importance, nor does one set any value on the 
assertion that all these thoughts have participated in the formation of the dream; oh the 
contrary, they may include notions Which are associated with experiences that have 
occurred subsequently to the dream, between the dream and the interpretation.
This part comprises not only all the connecting-paths which have led from the manifest to 
the latent dream-content, but also the intermediate and approximating associations by 
means of which one has arrived at acknowledge of these connecting-paths during the work 
of interpretation.
At this point we are^ interested exclusively in the essential dream-thoughts; These 
commonly reveal themselves as a complex of thoughts and memories of the most intricate  
possible construction with all the characteristics of the thought- processes known to us 
in waking life. Not infrequently they are trains of thought which proceed from more than 
one centre, but which are not without points of contact; and almost invariably we find, 
along with a train of thought, its contradictory counter part, connected with it by the 
association of contrast. 
The individual parts of this complicated structure naturally stand in the most manifold 
logical relations to one another. They constitute foreground and background, digressions, 
illustrations conditions, lines of argument and objections. When the whole mass of these 
dream-thoughts is -subjected' to the pressure of the dream-Work, during which the 
fragments are turned about/ broken up and compacted, somewhat like drifting ice, the 
question arises: What becomes of the logical ties which had hitherto provided the 
framework of the structure? What representation do if, because, as
¹I have since given the complete analysis and synthesis of two dreams in the Brtichstuck 
einer  Hysterieamlyse, (1905) (Ges. Schriften, Vol.;.VII). "Fragment of an Analysis of a 
Case of Hysteria," translated by Strachey, Collected Tapers, Vol. m, (Hogarth Press, 
London). O. Rank's analysis, Em Traum der sich selbst deutet, deserves mention as the 
most complete interpretation of a comparatively long dream.
though, although, either—or and all the other conjunctions, without which we cannot: 
understand a phrase or a sentence, receive in cut dreams? 
To begin with, we must answer that the dream has at its. disposal no means of 
representing these logical relations between the dream-thoughts. In most cases it 
disregards all these conjunctions and undertakes the elaboration only of the material 
content of the dream-thoughts. It is left to the interpretation of the dream to restore 
the coherence which the. dream-work has destroyed.
If dreams lack the ability to express, these relations, the psychic material of which 
they are wrought must be responsible for this defect. As a matter of fact, the 
representative arts— painting and sculptures—are similarly restricted, as compared 
with poetry, which is able to employ speech; and here again the reason for this 
limitation lies in the material by the elaboration of which the two plastic arts 
endeavour to express something. Before the art of painting arrived at an understandings 
of the laws of expression by which it is bound, it attempted to make up lor this 
deficiency. In old paintings little labels hung out of the mouths of the persons 
represented, giving in- writing the speech which the artist despaired of expressing in 
the picture.
Here, perhaps an objection will be raised, challenging the assertion that our dreams 
dispense with the representation, of logical relation. There are dreams in which the most 
complicated! intellectual operations take placed arguments for and against are adduced 
jokes and comparisons are made, just as in our waking thoughts. But here again 
appearances are deceptive; if the interpretation of such dreams is continued it will be 
found that all these things are dream-material, not the representation of intellectual 
activity in the dream: The-content of the; dream-thoughts' is reproduced by the apparent 
thinking in our dreams, but hot the relations of the dream-thoughts to one another, in 
the determination of which relations thinking consists. I shall give some examples of 
this. But the fact which is most easily established is that all speeches which occur in 
dreams, and which are expressly designated as such, are unchanged or drily- slightly 
modified replicas of -speeches which occur likewise among the memories in the dream 
material. Often the each is only an allusion to an event contained in the dream-thoughts; 
the meaning of the dream is quite different.
However, I shall not dispute the fact that even critical thought-activity, which does not 
simply repeat material from the dream thoughts, plays a part in dream-formation. I shall 
have to explain the influence of this factor at the close of this discussion. It will 
then become clear that this thought activity is evoked not by the dream-thoughts, but by 
the dream itself, after it is, in, a certain sense, already completed.
Provisionally, then, it is agreed that the logical relations between the dream-thoughts 
do not obtain any particular representation in the dream. For instance, where there is a 
contradiction in the dream, this is either a contradiction directed against the dream 
itself or a contradiction contained in one of the dream-thoughts; a contradiction in the 
dream corresponds with a contradiction between the dream-thoughts only in the most 
indirect and intermediate fashion.
But just as the art of painting finally succeeded in depicting, in the persons 
represented, at least the intentions behind their words- tenderness, menace, admonition, 
and the like— by other means than by floating labels, so also the dream has found it 
possible to render an account of certain of the logical relations between its 
dream-thoughts by an appropriate modification of the peculiar method of dream 
representation. It will be found by experience that different dreams go to different 
lengths in this respect; while one dream will entirely dis regard the logical structure 
of its material, an other attempts to indicate it as completely as, possible. In so 
doing, the dream departs more: or less widely from the text which it has to elaborate; 
and its attitude is equally variable in respect to the temporal articulation of the 
dream-thoughts, if such has been established in the unconscious (as, for example, in the 
dream of Irma's injection).
But what are the means by which the dream-work is enabled to indicate those relations in 
the dream-material which are difficult to represent? I shall attempt to enumerate these, 
one by one.
In the first place, the dream renders an account of the connection which is undeniably 
present between all the portions of the dreams-thoughts by combining this material into a 
unity as. a situation or a proceeding. It reproduces logical connections in the form of 
simultaneity; in this case, it behaves rather like the painter who groups together all 
the philosophers or poets in a picture of the School of Athens, or Parnassus. They never 
were assembled in any hall or on any mountain-top, although to. the reflective mind they 
do constitute a community.
The dream carries out in detail this mode of representation. Whenever it shows two 
elements close together, it vouches for a particularly intimate connection between their 
corresponding representatives in the dream-thoughts. It is as in our method of writing: 
to signifies that the two letters are to be pronounced as one syllable; while t with o 
following a blank space indicates that t is the last letter of one word and 0 the first 
letter of another. Consequently, dream-combinations are not made up. of arbitrary, 
completely incongruous elements of the dream-material, but of elements that are pretty 
intimately related in the dream-thoughts also.
For representing causal relations our dreams employ two methods, which are essentially 
reducible to one. The method of representation more frequently employed-in cases, for 
example, where the dream-thoughts are to the effect: "Because this was thus and thus, 
this and that must happen"—consists in making the subordinate clause a prefatory dream 
and joining the principal clause on to it in the form of the main dream. If my 
interpretation is correct, the sequence may likewise be reversed. The principal clause 
always corresponds; to that part of the dream which is elaborated in the greatest detail.
An excellent example of such a representation of causality was once provided by a female 
patient, whose dream I shall subsequently give in full. The dream consisted of a short 
prologue, and of a very circumstantial and very definitely centred dream-composition. I 
might entitle it "Flowery language." The preliminary dream is as follows: She goes to the 
two maids in the kitchen and scolds them for taking so long to prepare" a little bite of 
food." She also sees a very large number of heavy kitchen uten sils in the kitchen turned 
upside down in order to drain, even heaped up in stacks. The two maids go to fetch water, 
and have, as it were, to climb into a river, which reaches up to the, house or into the 
courtyard.
Then follows the main dream, which begins; as follows: She is climbing down from a height 
over a curiously shaped trellis, and she is glad that her dress doesn't get caught 
anywhere, etc. Now the preliminary dream refers to the house of the lady's parents. The 
words which are spoken in the kitchen are words which she has probably often heard spoken 
by her mother.
The piles of clumsy pots and pans are taken from an unpretentious hardware shop located 
in the same house. The second part of this dream contains an allusion to the dreamers 
father, who was always pestering the maids, and who during a flood—for the house stood 
close to the bank of the river—contracted a fatal illness. The thought which is 
concealed behind the preliminary dream is something like this: "Because I was born in 
this house, in such sordid and unpleasant surroundings . . ." The main dream takes up the 
same thought, and presents it in a form that has been altered by a wish-fulfilment: "I am 
of exalted origin." Properly then: "Because I am of such humble origin, the course of my 
life has been so and so."
As far as I can see, the division of a dream into two unequal portions does not always 
signify a causal relation between the thoughts of the two portions. It often seems as 
though in the two dreams the same material were present ed from different points of view; 
this is certainly the case when a series of dreams, dreamed the same night, end in a 
seminal emission, the somatic need enforcing a more and more definite expression. Or the 
two dreams have proceeded from two separate centres in the dream-material, and they 
overlap one another in the content, so that the subject which in one dream constitutes 
the centre cooperates in the other as an allusion, and vice versa. But in a certain 
number of dreams the division into short preliminary dreams and long subsequent dreams 
actually signifies a causal relation between the two portions. The other method of 
representing the causal relation is employed with less comprehensive material, and 
consists in the transformation of an image in the dream into another image, whether it be 
of a person or a thing. Only where this transformation is actually seen occurring in the 
dream shall we seriously insist on the causal relation; not where we simply note that one 
thing has taken the place of another. I said that both methods of representing the causal 
relation are really reducible to the same method; in both cases causation is represented 
by succession, sometimes by the succession of dreams, sometimes by the immediate 
transformation of one image into another. In the great majority of cases, of course, the 
causal relation is not represented at all, but is effaced amidst the succession of 
elements that is unavoidable even in the dream-process.
Dreams are quite incapable of expressing the alternative either—or; it is their custom 
to take both members of this alternative into the same context, as though they had an 
equal right to be: there. A classic example of this is contained in the dream of Irma's 
injection. Its latent thoughts obviously mean: I am not re sponsible for the persistence 
of Irma's pains; the responsibility rests either with her resistance to accepting the 
solution or with the fact that she is living under unfavourable sexual conditions, which 
I am unable to change, or her pains are not hysterical at all, but organic. The dream, 
however, carries out all these possibilities, which are almost mutually exclusive, and is 
quite ready to add a fourth solution derived from the dream-wish. After interpreting the 
dream, I then inserted the either—or in its context in the dream-thoughts.
But when in narrating a dream the narrator is inclined to employ the alternative 
either—or: "It was either a garden or a living-room," etc., there is not really an 
alternative in the dream thoughts, but an and—a simple addition. When we use 
either—or we are as a rule describing a quality of vagueness in some element of the 
dream, but a vagueness which may still be cleared up. The rule to be applied in this case 
is as follows: The individual members of the alternative are to be treated as equal and 
connected by an and. For instance, after waiting long and vainly for the address of a 
friend who is travelling in Italy, I dream that I receive a telegram which gives me the 
address. On the telegraph form I see printed in blue letters: the first word is 
blurred—perhaps via or villa; the second is distinctly Sezerno, or even (Casa).
The second word, which reminds me of Italian names, and of our discussions on etymology, 
also expresses my annoyance in respect of the fact that my friend has kept his address a 
secret from me; but each of the possible first three words may be recognized on analysis 
as an independent and equally justifiable starting point in the concatenation of ideas. 
During the night before the funeral of my father I dreamed of a printed placard, a card 
or poster rather like the notices in the waiting rooms of railway stations which announce 
that smoking is prohibited. The sign reads either:
You are requested to shut the eyes
or
You are requested to shut one eye 
an alternative which I am in the habit of representing in the following form:
You are requested to shut the one eye(s).
Each of the two versions has its special meaning, and leads along particular paths in the 
dream-interpretation. I had made the simplest possible funeral arrangements, for I knew 
what the deceased thought about such matters. Other members of the family, however, did 
not approve of such puritanical simplicity; they; thought we should feel ashamed in the 
presence of the other mourners/Hence one of the wordings of the dream asks for the 
shutting of one eye, that is to say, it asks that people should show consideration. The 
significance of the vagueness, which is here represented by an either—or, is plainly to 
be seen. The dreamwork has not succeeded in concocting a coherent and yet ambiguous 
wording for the dream thoughts. Thus the two principal trains of thought are separated 
from each other, even in the dream-content.
In some few cases the division of a dream into two equal parts expresses the alternative 
which the dream finds it so difficult to present.
The attitude of dreams to the category of antithesis and contradiction is very striking. 
This category is simply ignored; the word No does not seem to exist for a dream. Dreams 
are particularly fond of reducing antitheses to uniformity, or representing them as one 
and the same thing. Dreams likewise take the liberty of representing any element whatever 
by its desired opposite, so that it is at first impossible to tell, in respect of any 
element which is capable of having an opposite, whether it is contained in the 
dream-thoughts in the negative of the positive sense,¹ In one of the recently cited 
dreams, whose introductory portion we have already interpreted ("because my origin is so 
and so"), the dreamer climbs down over a trellis, and holds a blossoming bough in her 
hands. Since this picture suggests to her the angel in paintings of the Annunciation (her 
own name is Mary) bearing a lily-stem in his
¹From a work of K. Abel's, Der Gegensinn der Urworte, (1884), (see my review of it in 
the Bleuler- Freud Jahrbuch, ii (191-0) (Ges. Schriften, Vol. x). I learned the 
surprising fact, which is confirmed by other philologists, that the oldest languages 
behaved just as dreams do in this regard. They had originally only one word for both 
extremes in a series of qualities or activities (strong—weak, old—young, far—near, 
bind—separate), and formed separate designations for the two opposites only 
secondarily, by slight modifications of the common primitive word. Abel demonstrates a 
very large number of those relationships in ancient Egyptian, and points to distinct 
remnants of the same development in the Semitic and Indo-Germanic languages.
hand, and the white-robed girls walking in procession on Corpus Christi Day, when =the 
streets are decorated with green boughs, the blossoming bough in the dream is quite 
clearly an allusion to sexual innocence. But the bough is thickly studded with red 
blossoms, each of which resembles a camellia. At the end of her walk (so the dream 
continues) the blossoms are: already beginning to fall; then follow un mistakable 
allusions to menstruation. But this very bough, which is carried like a lily-stem and as 
though by an innocent girl, is also an allusion to Camille, who, as we know, usually wore 
a white camellia, but a red one during menstruation. The same blossoming bough ("the 
flower of maidenhood" in Goethe's songs of the miller's daughter) represents at once 
sexual innocence and its opposite. Moreover, the same dream, which expresses the 
dreamer's joy at having succeeded in passing through life unsullied, hints in several 
places (as in the falling of the blossom) at the opposite train of thought, namely, that 
she had been guilty of various sins against sexual purity (that is, in her childhood). In 
the analysis of the dream we may clearly distinguish the two trains of thought, of which 
the comforting one seems to be superficial, and the reproachful one more profound. The 
two are diametrically opposed to each other, and their similar yet contrasting elements 
have been represented by identical dream-elements. 
The mechanism of dream-formation is favourable in the highest degree to only one of the 
logical relations. This relation is that of similarity, agreement, contiguity, just as; a 
relation which may be represented in our dreams, as no other can be, by the most varied 
expedients. The screening which occurs in the dream-material, or the cases of just as are 
the chief points of support for dream-formation, and a not inconsiderable part of the 
dreamwork consists in creating new screenings of this kind in cases where those that 
already exist are prevented by the resistance of the censorship from making their Way 
into the dream. The effort towards condensation evinced by the dream-work facilitates the 
representation of a relation of similarity.
Similarity, agreement, community, are quite generally expressed in dreams by contraction 
into a unity, which is either already found in the dream-material or is newly created. 
The first case may be referred to as identification, the second as composition. 
Identification is used where the dream is concerned with persons, compositions where 
things constitute the material to be unified, but compositions are also made of persons. 
Localities are often treated as persons.
Identification consists in giving representation in the dream-content to only one of two 
or more persons who are related some common feature while the second person or mother 
persons appear to be suppressed as far as the dream is concerned. In the dream this one 
“screening” person enters into all the relation and situations which derive from the 
persons whom he screens. In cases of composition however, when persons are combined, 
there are already present' in the dream-image features which are characteristic of, but 
not common to, the persons in questions, so that a new unity, a composite person, appears 
as the result of the union of these features; The combination itself may be effected in 
various' ways. Either the dream-person bears the: name of one of the persons to whom he 
refers-and in this case we simply know, in a manner that is quite analogous to knowledge 
in waking life, that this or that person is intended--while the visual features belong to 
another person; or; the dream-image itself is compounded of visual features which in 
reality are derived from the two. Also, in place of the visual features, the part played 
by the second person may be represented by the attitudes and gestures which are usually 
ascribed to him by the words he speaks, or by the situations in which he is placed. In 
this latter method of characterization the sharp distinction between the identification 
and the combination of persons begins to disappear But it may also: happen that the. 
formation of such a composite person Is unsuccessful. The situations or actions of the 
dream are then attributed to one person, and the other- as a rule the more important—is 
introduced as an; 'inactive spectator. Perhaps the dreamer will say: "My mother was there 
too" (Stekel). Such an element of the dream content is then comparable to a determinative 
in hieroglyphic script which is not meant to be expressed, but is intended only to 
explain another sign.
The common feature which justifies the union of two persons—that is to say, which 
enables it to be made—may either be represented in the dream or it may be absent. As a 
rule; identification or composition of persons actually serves to avoid the necessity of 
representing this common feature. Instead of repeating A is ill-disposed towards me, and 
so is B,” I make, in my dream, a composite person of A and B; or I conceive A as doing 
something which is alien to his character but which is characteristic of B. the 
dream-person obtained in this way appears in the dream in some new connection, and the 
fact that he signifies both A and B justifies my inserting that which is common to both 
person-their hostility towards me- at the proper place in the dream-interpretation. In 
this manner I-often achieve a quite extraordinary degree of condensation of the 
dream-content; I am able to dispense with the direct representation of the very 
complicated relations belonging to one person, if I can find a second person who has an 
equal claim to some of these relations. It will be readily understood how far this 
representation by means of identification may circumvent the censoring resistance which 
sets up: such harsh conditions for the dream-work The thing that offends the censorship 
may reside in those very ideas which are" connected in the dream material with the one 
person; I now find a second person, who likewise stands in some relation to the 
objectionable material, but only to a part of it. Contact at that one point which offends 
the censorship justifies my formation of a composite person, who is characterized by the 
indifferent features of each. This person the result of combination or identification; 
being free of the censorship, is now suitable for incorporation in the dream-content. 
Thus, by the application of dream condensation, I have satisfied the demands of the 
dream-censorship:
When a common feature of two persons is represented in a dream, this is usually a hint to 
look for another concealed common feature, the representation of which is made impossible 
by the censorship. Here a displacement of the common feature has occurred, which in some 
degree facilitates representation. From the circumstance that the composite person is 
shown to me in the dream with an indifferent common feature, I must infer that another 
common feature which is by rid means indifferent exists in the dream-thoughts.
Accordingly, the identification or combination of persons serves various purposes in our 
dreams; in the first place, that of representing a feature common to two persons; 
secondly, that of representing a displaced common feature;, and, thirdly, that of 
expressly  a community of features which is merely wished for. As the wish for a 
community of features in two persons often coincides with the inter- changing of these 
persons, this relation also is expressed in dreams by identification. In the dream of 
Irma's injection I wish to exchange one patient for another—that is to say, I wish this 
other person to be my patient, as the former person has been; the dream deals with this 
wish by showing me a person who is called Irma, but who is examined in a position such as 
I have had occasion to see only the other person occupy. In the dream about my uncle this 
substitution is made the centre of the dream; I identify myself with the minister by 
judging and treating my colleagues as shabbily as he does.
It has been my experience—and to this I have found no exception—that every dream 
treats of oneself. Dreams are absolutely egoistic.¹ In cases where not my ego but only a 
strange person occurs in the dream-content, I may safely assume that by means of 
identification my ego is concealed behind that person. I am permitted to supplement my 
ego. On other occasions, when my ego appears in the dream, the situation in which it is 
placed tells me that another person is concealing himself, by means of identification, 
behind the ego. In this case I must be prepared to find that in the interpretation I 
should transfer something which is connected with this person—the hidden common 
feature—to myself. There are also dreams in which my ego appears together with other 
persons who, when the identification is resolved, once more show themselves to be my ego. 
Through these identifications I shall then have to connect with my ego certain ideas to 
which the censorship has objected. I may also give my ego multiple representation in.my 
dream, either directly or by means of identification with other people. By means of 
several such identifications an extraordinary amount of thought material may be 
condensed.² That one's ego should appear in the same dream several times or in different 
forms is fundamentally no more surprising than that it should appear, in conscious 
thinking, many times and in different places or in different relations: as, for example, 
in the sentence: "When I think what a healthy child I was."
Still easier than in the case of persons is the resolution of identifications in the case 
of localities designated by their own names, as here
¹Cf. here the observations made on pp. 249-50.
²If I do not know behind which of the persons appearing in the dream I am to look for my 
ego, I observe the following rule: That person in the dream who is "subject to an. 
emotion which I am aware of while asleep is the one that conceals my ego.

the disturbing influence of the all-powerful ego is lacking. In one of my dreams of Rome 
(p. 218) the name of the place in which I find myself is Rome; I am surprised, however, 
by a large number of German placards at a street corner. This last is a wish-fulfilment, 
which immediately suggests Prague; the wish itself probably originated at a period of my 
youth when I was imbued with a German nationalistic spirit which today is quite subdued. 
At the time of my dream I was looking forward to meeting a friend in Prague; the 
identification of Rome with Prague is therefore explained by a desired common feature; I 
would rather meet my friend in Rome than in Prague; for the purpose of this meeting I 
should like to exchange Prague for Rome.
The possibility of creating composite formations is one of the chief causes of the 
fantastic character so common in dreams, in that it introduces into the dream-content 
elements which could never have been objects of perception,  The psychic process which 
occurs in the creation of composite formations is obviously the same as that which we 
employ in conceiving or figuring a dragon or a centaur in our waking senses. The only 
difference is that, in the fantastic creations of waking life, the impression intended is 
itself the decisive factor, while the composite formation in the dream is determined by a 
factor—the common feature in the dream-thoughts—which is independent of its form. 
Composite formations in dreams may be achieved in a great many different ways. In the 
most artless of these methods, only the properties of the one thing are represented, and 
this representation is accompanied by a knowledge that they refer to another object also; 
A more careful technique combines features of the one object with those of the other in a 
new image; while it makes skillful use of any really existing resemblances between the 
two objects. The new creation may prove to be wholly absurd, or even successful as a 
phantasy, according as the material and the wit employed in constructing it may permit. 
If the objects to be condensed into a unity are too incongruous, the dream-work is 
content with creating a composite formation with a comparatively distinct nucleus, to 
which are attached more indefinite modifications. The unification into one image has here 
been to some extent unsuccessful; the two representations overlap one another, and give 
rise to something like a contest between the visual images. Similar representations might 
be obtained in a drawing if one were to attempt to give form to a unified abstraction of 
disparate perceptual images.
Dreams naturally abound in such composite formations; I have given several examples of 
these in the dreams already analysed, and will now cite more such examples. In the dream 
on p. 268, which describes the career of my patient in flowery language, the dream-ego 
carries a spray of blossoms in her hand which, as we have seen, signifies at once sexual 
innocence and sexual transgression. Moreover, from the manner in which the blossoms are 
set on, they recall cherry-blossom; the blossoms themselves, considered singly, are 
camellias, and finally the whole spray gives the dreamer the impression of an exotic 
plant. The common feature in the elements of this composite formation is revealed by the 
dream-thoughts. The blossoming spray is made up of allusions to presents by which she was 
induced or was to have been induced to behave in a manner agreeable to the giver. So it 
was with cherries in her childhood, and with a camellia-tree in her later years; the 
exotic character is an allusion to a much-travelled naturalist, who sought to win her 
favour by means of a drawing of a flower. Another female patient contrives a composite 
mean out of bathing machines at a seaside resort, country privies, and the attics of our 
city dwelling-houses. A reference to human nakedness and exposure is common to the first 
two elements; and we may infer from their connection with the third element that (in her 
childhood), the garret was likewise the scene of bodily exposure. A dreamer of the male 
sex makes a composite locality out of two places in which "treatment" is given—my 
office and the assembly rooms in which he first became acquainted with his wife. Another, 
a female patient, after her elder brother has promised to regale her with caviar, dreams 
that his legs are covered all over with black beads of caviar. The two elements, taint in 
a moral sense and the recollection of a cutaneous eruption in childhood which made her 
legs look as though studded over with red instead of black spots, have here combined with 
the beads of caviar to form a new idea—the idea of what she gets from her brother. In 
this dream parts of the human body are treated as objects, as is usually the case in 
dreams. In one of the dreams recorded by Ferenczi there occurs a composite formation made 
up of the person of a physician and a horse, and this composite being wears a 
night-shirt. The common feature in these three components was revealed in the analysis, 
after the nightshirt had been recognized as an allusion to the father of the dreamer in a 
scene of childhood. In each of the three cases there was some object of her sexual 
curiosity. As a child she had often been taken by her nurse to the army stud, where she 
had the amplest opportunity to satisfy her curiosity, at that time still uninhibited.
I have already stated that the dream has no means of expressing the relation Of 
contradiction, contrast, negation. I shall now contradict this assertion for the first 
time. A certain number of cases of what may be summed up under the word contrast obtain 
representation, as we have seen, simply by means of identification— that is, when an 
exchange, a substitution, can be bound up with the contrast. Of this we have cited 
repeated examples. Certain other of the contrasts in the dream-thoughts, which perhaps 
come under the category of inverted, turned into the opposite, axe represented in dreams 
in the following remarkable manner, which may almost be described as witty. The inversion 
does not itself make its way into the dream-content, but manifests its presence in the 
material by the fact that a part of the already formed dream-content which is, for other 
reasons, closely connected in context is—as it were subsequently—inverted. It is 
easier to illustrate this process than to describe it. In the beautiful "Up and Down" 
dream (pp. 255-6) the dream-representation of ascending is an inversion of its prototype 
in the dream thoughts: that is, of the introductory scene of Daudet's Sappho; in the 
dream, climbing is difficult at first and easy later on, whereas, in the novel, it is 
easy at first, and later becomes more and more difficult. Again, above and below, with 
reference to the dreamer's brother, are reversed in the dream. This points to a relation 
of inversion or contrast between two parts of the material in the dream-thoughts, which 
indeed we found in them, for in the childish phantasy of the dreamer he is carried by his 
nurse, while in the novel, on the contrary, the hero carries his beloved. My dream of 
Goethe's attack on Herr M (to be cited later) likewise contains an inversion of this 
sort, which must be set right before the dream can be interpreted. In this dream, Goethe 
attacks a young man, Herr M; the reality, as contained in the dream-thoughts, is that an 
eminent man, a friend of mine, has been attacked by an unknown young author. In the dream 
I reckon time from the date of Goethe's death; in reality the reckoning was made from the 
year in which the paralytic was born. The thought which influences the -dream-material 
reveals itself as my [opposition to the treatment of Goethe as though he were as lunatic. 
"It is the other way about," says the dream; “if you don't understand the book it is: 
you who are feeble-minded, not the author." All a these dreams of inversion, moreover, 
seem, to me to imply an allusion to the contemptuous -phrase, "to turn one's back upon a 
person": (German: einem Se Kehrsefte zeiggn, lit, to, show a person one’s backside): 
cf. the inversion in respect of the dreamer's brother in the Sappho dream. It is further 
worth noting how frequently inversion is employed in precisely those dreams: which are 
inspired by repressed homosexual impulses.
Moreover, inversion, or transformation into the opposite, is one ;pf the; most favoured 
and most versatile, methods pf representation which the dream-work; has at its disposal. 
It serves, in the first place, to enable the wish-fulfilment to prevail against a 
definite element of the dream-thoughts. "If; only it were the other way about!" is often 
the best expression for the reaction of the ego against a disagreeable recollection. But 
inversion becomes extraordinarily useful: in the service: of the censorship, for it 
effects, in the material to be represented, a degree of distortion which at first simply 
paralyses our understanding of the dream. It is therefore always permissible, if a 
dream-stubbornly refuses to surrender its meaning, to venture on the experimental 
inversion definite, portions of its manifest content. Then, not infrequently, everything 
becomes clear.
Besides the inversion of content, the temporal inversion must not be overlooked, A 
frequent device of dream-distortion. consists in, presenting the final issue of the event 
or the conclusion of the train of thought at the beginning of the dream, and appending at 
the end of the dream the premises; of the conclusion; or, the causes of -the event:: 
Anyone who. forgets this technical device of dream-distortion stands helpless before-the 
problem of dream-interprertation.¹
¹The hysterical attack often employs the same device, of temporal inversion in order to 
conceal its meaning from the observer. The attack of a hysterical girl, for example, 
consists in enacting a little romance, which she has imagined in the unconscious; in 
connection with an encounter in a tram., A man, attracted by the beauty of her foot, 
addresses her while she is reading, whereupon she goes with him and a  passionate lover 
scene. ensues. Her attack begins with the representation of this scene by writhing 
movements of the body (accompanied by movements of>'4he lips, and folding of the arms to, 
signify, kisses and embraces)., whereupon she Hurries into the next room, sits down on a 
chair, lifts her skirt in order to show her foot, acts as though she were about ta. read 
a book, and speaks to me (answers me). Cf. the observation': of Artemrdorus: "In 
interpreting dream-stories, one must consider, them the first time from the beginning to 
the end, and the second time from the end to the beginning."
In many cases, indeed, we discover the meaning of the dream only when we have subjected 
the dream-content to a multiple inversion in accordance with, the different relations. 
For example, in the dream of a young patient who is suffering from obsessional neurosis, 
the memory of the childish death-wish directed against a dreaded father concealed itself 
behind the following words: His father scolds him because he comes home so late, but the 
context of the psycho-analytic treatment and the impressions of the dreamer show that the 
sentence must behead.as follows: He is angry with his father, and further, that his 
father always mine home too early (i.e., too soon). He would have preferred, that his 
father should/not come home at all, which is identical with the, wish (see p. ,245) that 
his father would die. As a little boy, during the prolonged absence of his father, the 
dreamer was guilty of a sexual aggression against another, child, and was punished by the 
threat; “Just you wait until your father comes home!”
If we should seek to trace the relations between the dream-content: and the dream 
thoughts a little farther, we shall do this best by making the dream itself our point of 
departure, and, asking ourselves: What do certain formal characteristics of the 
dream-presentation signify in relation to the. dream-thoughts? First and foremost among 
the formal characteristics which are bound; to impress us in dreams are, the differences 
in the sensory intensity of the single dream-images, and in the
distinctness of various parts of the dream, or of whole dreams as compared with one 
another. The differences in, the intensity of individual dream-images cover the. whole 
gamut, from a sharpness of definition which one is inclined- although without 
warrant-—to rate more highly than that of reality, to a provoking indistinctness which 
we declare to be characteristic of dreams because it really is not wholly comparable to 
any of the degrees of indistinctness which we occasionally perceive in real objects. 
Moreover, we usually ^describe, the impression which we receive of an indistinct object 
in a dream as fleeting,  while we think of the more distinct dream-images as haying beep 
perceptible also for a longer period of time. We must now ask ourselves by what 
conditions in the dream-material these differences in the distinct ness of the individual 
portions of the dream content are brought about.
Before proceeding farther, it is necessary to deal with certain expectations which seem 
to be almost inevitable. Since actual sensations experienced during sleep may constitute 
part of the dream-material, it will probably be assumed that these sensations, or the 
dream elements resulting from them, are emphasized by a special intensity, or conversely, 
that any thing which is particularly vivid in the dream can probably be traced to such 
real sensations during sleep. My experience, however, has never confirmed this. It is not 
true that those elements of a dream which are derivatives of real impressions perceived 
in sleep (nerve stimuli) are distinguished by their special vividness from others which 
are based on memories. The factor of reality is inoperative in determining the intensity 
of dream-images. 
Further, it might be expected that the sensory intensity (vividness) of single 
dream-images is in proportion to the psychic intensity of the elements corresponding to 
them in the dream-thoughts. In the latter, intensity is identical with psychic value; the 
most intense elements are in fact the most significant, and these constitute the central 
point of the dream thoughts. We know, however, that it is precisely these elements which 
are usually not admitted to the dream-content, owing to the vigilance of the censorship. 
Still, it might be possible for their most immediate derivatives, which represent them in 
the dream, to reach a higher degree of intensity without, however, for that reason 
constituting the central point of the dream-representation. This assumption also vanishes 
as soon as we compare the dream and the dream-material. The intensity of the elements in 
the one has nothing to do with the intensity of the elements in the other; as a matter of 
fact, a complete transvaluation of all psychic values takes place between the dream 
material and the dream. The very element of the dream which is transient and hazy, and 
screened by more vigorous images, is often discovered to be the one and only direct 
derivative of the topic that completely dominates the dream-thoughts.
The intensity of the dream-elements proves to be determined in a different manner: that 
is, by two factors which are mutually independent. It will readily be understood that 
those elements by means of which the wish-fulfilment expresses itself are those which are 
intensely represented. But analysis tells us that from the most vivid elements of the 
dream the greatest number of trains of thought proceed, and that those which are most 
vivid are at the same time those which are best determined. No change of meaning is 
involved if we express this latter empirical proposition in the following formula: The 
greatest intensity is shown by those elements of the dream for whose formation the most 
extensive condensation-work was required. We may, therefore, expect that it will be 
possible to express this condition, as well as the other condition of the 
wish-fulfilment, in a single formula.
I must utter a warning that the problem which I have just been considering—the causes 
of the greater or lesser intensity or distinctness of single elements in dreams—is not 
to be confounded with the other problem—that of variations in the distinctness of whole 
dreams or sections of dreams. In the former case the opposite of distinctness is 
haziness; in the latter, confusion. It is, of course, undeniable that in both scales the 
two kinds of intensities rise and fall in unison. A portion of the dream which seems 
clear to us usually contains vivid elements; an obscure dream, on the contrary, is 
composed of less vivid elements. But the problem offered by the scale of definition, 
which ranges from the apparently clear to the indistinct or confused, is far more 
complicated than the problem of fluctuations in vividness of the dream-elements. For 
reasons which will be given later, the former cannot at this stage be further discussed. 
In isolated cases one observes, not without surprise, that the impression of distinctness 
or indistinctness produced by a dream has nothing to do with the dream-structure, but 
proceeds from the dream-material, as one of its ingredients. Thus, for example, I 
remember a dream which on waking seemed so particularly well-constructed, flawless and 
clear that I made up my mind, while I was still in a somnolent state, to admit a new 
category of dreams— those which had not been subject to the mechanism of condensation 
and distortion, and which might thus be described as phantasies during sleep. A closer 
examination, however, proved that this unusual dream suffered from the same structural 
flaws and breaches as exist in all other dreams; so I abandoned the idea of a category of 
dream-phantasies.¹ The content of the dream, reduced to its lowest terms, was that I was 
expounding to a friend a difficult
 ¹I do not know today whether I was Justified in doing so.
and long-sought theory of bisexuality, and the wish-fulfilling power of the dream was 
responsible for the fact that this theory (which, by the way, was not communicated in the 
dream) appeared to be so lucid and flawless. Thus, what I believed to be a judgment as 
regards the finished dream was a part, and indeed the most essential part, of the 
dream-content. Here the dream-work reached out, as it were, into my first waking 
thoughts, and presented to me, in the form of a judgment of the dream, that part of the 
dream-material which it had failed to represent with precision in the dream. I was once 
confronted with the exact counterpart of this case by a female patient who at first 
absolutely declined to relate a dream which was necessary for the analysis "because it 
was so hazy and confused," and Who finally declared, after repeatedly protesting the 
inaccuracy of her description, that it seemed to her that several persons—herself, her 
husband, and her father—had occurred in the dream, and that she had not known whether 
her husband was her father, or who really was her father, or something of that sort. 
Comparison of this dream with the ideas which occurred to the dreamer in the course of 
the sitting showed beyond a doubt that it dealt with the rather commonplace story of a 
maidservant who has to confess that she is expecting a child, and hears doubts expressed 
as to "who the father really is."¹ The obscurity manifested by this dream, therefore, 
was once more a portion of the dream-exciting material. A fragment of this material was 
represented in the form of the dream. The form of the dream or of dreaming is employed 
with astonishing frequency to represent the concealed content.
Glosses on the dream, and seemingly harmless comments on it, often serve in the most 
subtle manner to conceal—although, of course, they really betray—-a part of what is 
dreamed. As, for example, when the dreamer says: Here the dream was wiped out, and the 
analysis gives an infantile reminiscence of listening to someone cleaning himself after 
defecation. Or another example, which deserves to be recorded in detail: A young man has 
a very distinct dream, reminding him of phantasies of his boyhood which have remained 
conscious. He found himself in a hotel at a seasonal resort; it was night; he mistook the 
number of his room, and entered a room in which an elderly lady and her two
¹Accompanying hysterical symptoms; amenorrhoea and profund depression were the chief 
troubles of this patient.
daughters were undressing to go to bed. He continues: “Then there are some gaps in the 
dream; something is missing; and at the end there was a man in the room, who wanted to 
throw me out, and with whom I had to struggle." He tries in vain to recall the content 
and intention of the boyish phantasy to which the dream obviously alluded. But we finally 
become aware that the required content had already been given in his remarks concerning 
the in distinct part of the dream. The gaps are the genital apertures of the women who 
are going to bed: Here something is missing describes the principal characteristic of the 
female genitals. In his young days he burned with curiosity to see the female genitals, 
and was still inclined to adhere to the infantile sexual theory which at tributes a male 
organ to women.
A very similar form was assumed in an analogous reminiscence of another dreamer. He 
dreamed: I go with Fraulein K into the restaurant of the Volksgarten . . . then comes a 
dark place, an interruption . . . then I find myself in the salon of a brothel, where I 
see two or three women, one in a chemise and drawers.
Analysis. Fraulein K is the daughter of his former employer; as he himself admits, she 
was a sister-substitute. He rarely had the opportunity of talking to her, but they once 
had a conversation in which "one recognized one's sexuality, so to speak, as though one 
were to say: I am a man and you are a woman." He had been only once to the 
above-mentioned restaurant when he was accompanied by the sister of his brother-in-law, a 
girl to whom he was quite in different. On another occasion he accompanied three ladies 
to the door of the restaurant. The ladies were his sister, his sister-in-law, and the 
girl already mentioned. He was perfectly indifferent to all three of them, but they all 
be longed to the sister category. He had visited a brothel but rarely, perhaps two or 
three times in his life. 
The interpretation is based on the dark place, the interruption in the dream, and informs 
us that on occasion, but in fact only rarely, obsessed by his boyish curiosity, he had 
inspected the genitals of his sister, a few years his junior. A few days later the 
misdemeanor indicated in the dream recurred to his conscious memory.
All dreams of the same night belong, in respect of their content, to the same whole; 
their division into several parts, their grouping and number, are all full of meaning and 
may be regarded as pieces of information about the latent dream-thoughts. In the 
interpretation of dreams consisting of several main sections, or of dreams belonging to 
the same night, we must not over look the possibility that these different and successive 
dreams mean the same thing, expressing the same impulses in different material. That one 
of these homologous dreams which comes first in time is usually the most distorted and 
most bashful, while the next dream is bolder and more distinct.
Even Pharaoh's dream of the ears and the kine, which Joseph interpreted, was of this 
kind. It is given by Josephus in greater detail than in the Bible. After relating the 
first dream, the King said: "After I had seen this vision I awaked out of my sleep, and, 
being in disorder, and considering with myself what this appearance should be, I fell 
asleep again, and saw an other dream much more wonderful than the foregoing, which still 
did more affright and disturb me." After listening to the relation of the dream, Joseph 
said: "This dream, O King, although seen under two forms, signifies one and the same 
event of things."¹
Jung, in his Beitrag zur Psychologie des Geruchtes, relates how a veiled erotic dream of 
a schoolgirl was understood by her friends without interpretation, and. continued by them 
with variations, and he remarks, with reference to one of these narrated dreams, that 
"the concluding idea of a long series of dream-images had precisely the same content as 
the first image of the series had endeavoured to represent. The censorship thrust the 
complex out of the way as long as possible by a constant renewal of symbolic screenings, 
displacements, transformations into something harmless, etc." Scherner was well 
acquainted with this peculiarity of dream-representation, and describes it in his 
Lebendes Traumes (p. 16.6) in terms of a special law in the Appendix to his doctrine of 
organic stimulation: "But finally, in all symbolic dream-formations emanating from 
definite nerve stimuli, the phantasy observes the general law that at the beginning of 
the dream it depicts the stimulating object only by the remotest and freest allusions, 
but towards the end, when the graphic impulse becomes exhausted, the stimulus itself is 
nakedly represented by its appropriate organ or its function; whereupon the dream, itself 
describing its organic motive, achieves its end. ..."
A pretty confirmation of this law of Scherner's has been furnished by Otto Rank in his 
essay: Ein Traum, der sich selbst deutet. This
¹Josephus; Antiquities of the Jews, book n, chap, v, trans, by Wm. Whiston (David McKay, 
Philadelphia).
dream, related to him by a girl, consisted of two dreams of the same night, separated by 
an interval of time, the second of which ended with an orgasm. It was possible to 
interpret this orgastic dream in detail in spite of the few ideas contributed by the 
dreamer, and the wealth of relations between the two dream contents made it possible to 
recognize that the first dream expressed in modest language the same thing as the second, 
so that the latter— the orgastic dream—facilitated a full explanation of the former. 
From this example, Rank very justifiably argues the significance of orgastic dreams for 
the theory of dreams in general.
But, in my experience, it is only in rare cases that one is in a position to translate 
the lucidity or confusion of a dream, respectively, into a certainty or doubt in the 
dream-material. Later on I shall have to disclose a hitherto unmentioned factor in 
dream-formation, upon whose operation this qualitative scale in dreams is essentially 
dependent.
In many dreams in which a certain situation and environment are preserved for some time, 
there occur interruptions which may be described in the following words: "But then it 
seemed as though it were, at the same time, another place, and there such and such a 
thing happened," In these cases, what interrupts the main action of the dream, which 
after a while may be continued again, reveals itself in the dream-material as a 
subordinate clause, an interpolated thought. Conditionally in the dream thoughts is 
represented by simultaneity in the dream-content (wenn or wann=if or when, while).
We may now ask: What is the meaning of the sensation of inhibited movement which so often 
occurs in dreams, and is so closely allied to anxiety? One wants to move, and is unable 
to stir from the spot; or wants to accomplish something, and encounters obstacle after 
obstacle. The train is about to start, and one cannot reach it; one's hand is raised to 
avenge an insult, and its strength fails, etc. We have already met with this sensation in 
exhibition dreams, but have as yet made no serious attempt to interpret it. It is 
convenient, but in adequate, to answer that there is motor paralysis in sleep, which 
manifests itself by means of the sensation alluded to. We may ask: Why is it, then, that 
we do not dream continually of such inhibited movements? And we may permissibly suspect 
that this sensation, which may at any time occur during sleep, serves some sort of 
purpose for representation, and is evoked only when the need of this representation is 
present in the dream-material.
Inability to do a thing does not always appear in the dream as a sensation; it may appear 
simply as part of the dream-content. I think one case of this kind is especially fitted 
to enlighten us as to the meaning of this peculiarity. I shall give an abridged version 
of a dream in which I seem to be accused of dishonesty. The scene is a mixture made up of 
a private sanatorium and several other places. A manservant appears, to summon me to an 
inquiry. I know in the dream that something has been missed, and that the inquiry is 
taking place because I am suspected of having appropriated the lost article. Analysis 
shows that inquiry is to be taken in two senses; it includes the meaning of medical 
examination. Being conscious of my innocence, and my position as consultant in this 
sanatorium, I calmly-follow the manservant. We are-received at the door by another man 
servant, who says, pointing at me, "Have you brought him? Why, he is a respectable man." 
Thereupon, and unattended, I enter a great hall where there are many machines, which 
reminds me of an inferno with its hellish instruments of punishment. I see a colleague 
strapped to an appliance; he has every reason to be interested in my appearance, but he 
takes no notice of me. I understand that I may now go. Then I cannot find my hat, and 
cannot go after all.
The Wish that the dream fulfils is obviously the wish that my honesty shall be 
acknowledged, and that I may be permitted to go; there must therefore be all sorts of 
material in the dream-thoughts which comprise a contradiction of this wish. The fact that 
I may go is the sigh of my absolution; if, then, the dream provides at its close an event 
which prevents me from going, we may readily conclude that-the suppressed material of the 
contradiction is asserting itself in this feature. The fact that I cannot find my hat 
therefore means: "You are not after all an honest man." The inability to do something in 
the dream is the expression of a contradiction, a No; so that our earlier assertion to 
the effect that the dream is not capable of expressing a negation, must be revised 
accordingly.¹
¹A reference to an experience of childhood emerges, in the complete analysis, through 
the following connecting-links: "The Moor has done his duty, the Moor can go." And then 
follows the waggish question: "How old is the Moor when he has done his duty?":—"A 
year, then he can go (walk)." (It is said that I came into, the world with so much black 
curly hair that my young mother declared that I was a little Moor.) The fact that I 
cannot find my hat is an experience of the day which has been exploited in various 
senses. Our servant, who is a genius at stowing things away, had hidden the hat. A 
rejection of melancholy thoughts of death is concealed behind the conclusion of the 
dream: "I have not nearly done my duty yet; I cannot go yet." Birth and death 
together—as in the dream of Goethe and the paralytic, which was a little earlier in 
date.
In other dreams in which the inability to do something occurs; not merely as a situation, 
but also as a sensation, the same contradiction is more emphatically expressed by the 
sensation of inhibited movement, or a will to which a counter-will is opposed. Thus the 
sensation of inhibited movement represents a conflict of will. We shall see later on that 
this very-motor paralysis during sleep is one of the fundamental conditions of the 
psychic process which functions during dreaming. Now an impulse which is conveyed to the 
motor system is none other than the will, and the fact that we are certain that the 
impulse will be inhibited in sleep makes the whole process extraordinarily well-adapted 
to the representation of a will to wards something and of a No which opposes itself 
thereto. From my explanation of anxiety, it is easy to understand why the sensation of 
the inhibited will is so closely allied to anxiety, and why it is so often connected with 
it in dreams. Anxiety is a libidinal impulse, which emanates from the unconscious and is 
inhibited by the preconscious.² Therefore, when a sensation of inhibition in the dream 
is accompanied by anxiety, the dream must be concerned with a volition which was at one 
time capable of arousing libido; there must be a sexual impulse. 
As for the judgment which is often expressed during a dream: "Of course, it is only a 
dream,” and the psychic force to which it may be ascribed, I shall discuss these 
questions later on. For the present I will merely say that they are intended to 
depreciate the importance of what is being dreamed. The interesting problem allied to 
this, as to what is meant if a certain content in the dreamt is characterized in the 
dream itself as having been dreamed—the riddle of a dream within a dream—has been 
solved in a similar sense by W. Stekel, by the analysis of some convincing examples. Here 
again the part of the dream dreamed is to be depreciated in value and robbed of its 
reality; that which the dreamer continues to dream after waking from the dream within a 
dream is what the dream-wish desires to put in place
²This theory is not in accordance with more recent views.
of the obliterated reality. It may therefore be assumed that r the part dreamed contains 
the representation of the reality, the real memory, while, on the other hand, the 
continued dream contains the representation of what the dreamer merely wishes. The 
inclusion of a certain content in a dream within a dream is, therefore, equivalent to the 
wish that what has been characterized as a dream had never occurred. In other words: when 
a particular incident is represented by the dream-work in a dreamy it signifies the 
strongest confirmation of the reality of this incident, the most emphatic affirmation of 
it. The dream-work utilizes the dream itself as a form of repudiation; and thereby 
confirms the theory that a dream is a wish fulfilment.
D. Regard for Representability
We have hitherto been concerned with investigating the manner in which our dreams 
represent the relations "between the dream-thoughts; but we have often extended our 
inquiry to the further question as to what alterations the dream-material itself 
undergoes for the purposes of dream-formation. We now know that the dream-material, after 
being stripped of a great many of its relations, is subjected to compression, while at 
the same time displacements of the intensity of its elements-enforce a psychic 
transvaluation of this material. The displacements which we have considered were shown to 
be substitutions of one particular idea for another, in some way related to the original 
by its associations, and the displacements were made to facilitate the condensation, 
inasmuch as in this manner, instead of two elements, a common mean between them found its 
way into the dream. So fair, no mention has been made of any other kind of displacement. 
But we learn from the analyses that displacement of another kind does occur, and that it 
manifests itself in an exchange of the verbal expression for the thought in question. In 
both cases we are dealing with a displacement along a chain of associations, but the same 
process takes place in different psychic spheres, and the result of this displacement in 
the one case is that one element is replaced by another, while in the other; case an 
element exchanges its verbal shape for another.
This second kind of displacement occurring in dream-formation is not only of great 
theoretical interest, but also peculiarly well-fitted to explain the appearance of 
phantastic absurdity in which dreams disguise themselves. Displacement usually occurs in 
such a way. that a colourless and abstract expression of the dream-thought is ex changed 
for one that is pictorial'" and concrete; The advantage, and along with it the purpose, 
of tins substitution is obvious: Whatever is pictorial is capable of representation in 
dreams and can be, fitted into a situation in which abstract expression would confront 
the dream-representation with difficulties not unlike those which would arise if a 
political leading article had to be represented in an illustrated journal. Not only the 
possibility of representation,: but also the interests of condensation and of the 
censorship, may be furthered by this exchange. Once the abstractly expressed and 
unservice able dream-thought is translated into pictorial language, those, contacts and 
identities between this new expression and the rest of the dream material which are 
required by the dream-work; and which it contrives whenever they are not available, are 
more readily provided, since in every language concrete terms, owing to their evolution, 
are richer in associations than are abstract terms. It may be imagined that a good part 
of the intermediate work in dream-formation, which seeks to reduce the separate dream 
thoughts to the tersest and most Unified expression in the dream, is effected in this 
manner, by fitting paraphrases of the various thoughts; Theone thought whose mode of 
expression has perhaps been determined by other factors "will therewith exert a 
distributive and selective in fluence oh the expressions available for the others, and it 
may even do this from the very start, just as it would in the creative activity of a 
poet. When a poem is to be written in rhymed couplets, the second rhyming line is bound 
by two conditions: it must express" the meaning allotted to it, and its expression must 
permit of a rhyme with the first: line. The best poems are, of course, those in which one 
does not detect the effort to find a rhyme, and in which both thoughts have as a matter 
of course, by mutual induction, selected the verbal expression which, with a little 
subsequent adjustment, will permit of the rhyme.
In some cases the change of expression serves the purposes of dream-condensation more 
directly, in that it provides an arrangement of words which, being ambiguous, permits of 
the expression of more than one of the dream-' thoughts. The whole range of verbal wit is 
thus made to serve the purpose of the dream-work. The part played by words in 
dream-formation ought not to surprise us. A word, as the point. 
of junction of a number of ideas, possesses, as it were, a predestined ambiguity, and the 
neuroses (obsessions, phobias) take advantage of the opportunities for condensation and 
disguise afforded by words quite as eagerly as do dreams.¹ That dream-distortion also 
profits by this displacement of expression may be readily demonstrated. It is indeed 
confusing if one ambiguous word is substituted for two with single meanings, and the 
replacement of sober, every day language by a plastic mode of expression baffles our 
understanding, especially since a dream never tells us whether the elements presented by 
it are to be interpreted literally or metaphorically, whether they refer to the 
dream-material directly, or only by means of interpolated expressions. Generally 
speaking, in the interpretation of any element of a dream it is doubtful whether it
(a) is to be accepted in the negative or the positive sense (contrast relation);
(b) is to be interpreted historically (as a memory);
(c) is symbolic; or whether
(d) its valuation is to be based upon its wording.
In spite of this versatility, we may say that the representation effected by the 
dream-work, which was never even intended to be understood, does not impose upon the 
translator any greater difficulties than those that the ancient writers of hieroglyphics 
imposed upon their readers.
I have already given several examples of dream-representations which are. held together 
only by ambiguity of expression (her mouth opens without difficulty, in the dream of 
Irma's injection; I cannot go yet after all, in the last dream related, etc.). I shall 
now cite a dream in the analysis of which plastic representation of the abstract thoughts 
plays a greater part. The difference between such dream-interpretation and the 
interpretation by means of symbols may nevertheless be clearly defined; in the symbolic 
interpretation of dreams, the key to the symbolism is selected arbitrarily by the 
interpreter, while in our own cases of verbal disguise these keys are universally known 
and are taken from established modes of speech. Provided one hits on the right idea on 
the right occasion, one may solve dreams of this kind, either completely or in part, 
independently of
¹Compare Wit and its Relation to the Unconscious.
any statements made by the dreamer.
A lady, a friend of mine, dreams: She is at the opera. It is a Wagnerian -performance, 
which has lasted until 7.45 in the morning. In the stalls and pit there are tables, at 
which people are eating and drinking. Her cousin and his young wife, who have just 
returned from their honeymoon, are sitting at one of these tables; beside them is a 
member of the aristocracy. The young wife is said to have brought him back with her from 
the honeymoon quite openly, just as she might have brought back a hat. In the middle of 
the stalls there is a high tower, on the top of which there is a platform surrounded by 
an iron railing. There, high over head, stands the conductor, with the features of Hans 
Richter, continually running round behind the railing, perspiring terribly; and from this 
position he is conducting the orchestra, which is arranged round the base of the tower. 
She herself is sitting in a box with a friend of her own sex (known to me). Her younger, 
sister tries to hand her up, from the stalls, a large lump of coal, alleging that she had 
not known that it would be so long, and that she must by this time be miserably cold. (As 
though the boxes ought to have been heated during the long performance.)
Although in other respects the dream gives; a good picture of the situation, it is, of 
course, nonsensical enough: the tower in the middle of the stalls, from which the 
conductor leads the orchestra, and above all the coal which her sister hands up to her. I 
purposely asked for no analysis of this dream. With some knowledge of the personal 
relations of the dreamer, I was able to interpret parts of it independently of her. I 
knew that she had felt intense sympathy for a musician whose career had been prematurely 
brought to an end by insanity. I therefore decided to take the tower in the stalls 
verbally. It then emerged that the man whom she wished to see in the place of Hanst 
Riehter towered above all the other members of the orchestra. This tower must be 
described as a composite formation by means of apposition; by its substructure it 
represents the greatness of the man, but by the railing at the top, behind which he runs 
round like a prisoner or an animal in a cage (an allusion to the name of the unfortunate 
man),² it represents his later fate. Lunatic-tower is perhaps the expression in which 
the two thoughts might have met. Now that we have discovered the dream's method of 
representation, we may try, with
²Hugo Wolf.
the same key, to unlock the meaning of the second apparent absurdity, that of the coal 
which her sister hands up to the dreamer. Coal should mean secret love.
No fire, no coal so hotly glows
As the secret love of which no one knows.
She and her friend remain seated¹ while her younger sister, who still has a prospect of 
marrying, hands her up the coal because she did not know that it would be so long. What 
would be so long is not told in the dream. If it were an anecdote, we should say the 
performance; but in the dream we may consider the sentence as it is, declare it to be 
ambiguous, and add before she married. The interpretation secret love is then confirmed 
by the mention of the cousin who is sitting with his wife in the stalls, and by the open 
love-affair attributed to the latter. The contrasts between secret and open love, between 
the dreamer's fire and the coldness of the young wife, dominate the dream. Moreover, here 
once, again there is a person, in a high position as a middle term between the aristocrat 
and the musician who is justified in raising high hopes.
In the above analysis we have at last brought to light a third factor, whose part in the 
transformation of the dream-thoughts into the dream-content is by no means trivial: 
namely, consideration of the suitability of the dream thoughts for representation in the 
particular psychic material of which the dream makes use—that is, for the most part in 
visual images. Among the various subordinate ideas associated with the essential 
dream-thoughts, those will be preferred which permit of visual representation, and the 
dream-work does not hesitate to recast the intractable thoughts into another verbal form, 
even though this is a more unusual form, provided it makes representation possible, and 
thus puts an end to the psychological distress caused by strangulated thinking. This 
pouring of the thought content into another mould may at the same time serve the work of 
condensation, and may establish relations with another thought which otherwise would not 
have been established. It is even possible that this second thought may itself have 
previously changed its original expression for the purpose of meeting the first one half 
way.
Herbert Silberer² has described a good meth
¹The German sitzen geblieben is often applied to women who have not succeeded in getting 
married.— TR.
²Bleuler-Freud Jahrbuch, i (1909).

od of directly observing the transformation of thoughts into images which occurs in 
dream-formation, and has thus made it possible to study in isolation this one factor of 
the dreamwork. If, while in a state of fatigue and somnolence, he imposed upon himself a 
mental effort, it frequently happened that the thought escaped him, and in its place 
there appeared a picture in which he could recognize the substitute for the thought. Not 
quite appropriately, Silberer described this substitution as auto symbolic. I shall cite 
here a few examples from Silberer's work, and on account of certain peculiarities of the 
phenomena observed I shall refer to the subject later on.
"Example 1.1 remember that I have to correct a halting passage in an essay.
"Symbol. I see myself planing a piece of wood.
"Example 5.1 endeavour to call to mind the aim of certain metaphysical studies which I am 
proposing to undertake.
"This aim, I reflect, consists in working one's way through, while seeking for the basis 
of existence, to ever higher forms of consciousness or levels of being.
"Symbol. I run a long knife under a cake as though to take a slice out of it.
"Interpretation. My movement with the knife signifies working one's way through. . . . 
The explanation of the basis of the symbolism is as follows: At table it devolves upon me 
now and again to cut and distribute a cake, a business which I perform with a long, 
flexible knife, and which necessitates a certain amount of care. In particular, the neat 
extraction of the cut slices of cake presents a certain amount of difficulty; the knife 
must be carefully pushed under the slices ,in question (the-slow working one's way 
through in order to get to the bottom). But there is yet more symbolism in the picture. 
The cake of the symbol was really a dobosrcake—that is, a cake in which the knife has 
to cut through several layers (the levels of consciousness and thought).
"Example 9. I lost the thread in a train of thought. I make an effort to find it again, 
but I have to recognize that the point of departure has completely escaped me.
"Symbol. Part of a form of type, the last lines of which have fallen out."
In view of the part played by witticisms, puns, quotations, songs, and proverbs in the 
intellectual life of educated persons, it would be entirely in accordance with our 
expectations to find ^disguises of this sort used with extreme frequency in the 
representation of the dreams thoughts. Only in the case of a few types of material has a 
generally valid dream-symbolism, established^ itself on the basis of generally known 
allusions and verbal equivalents. A good part of this symbolism, however, is common to 
the psychoneuroses, legends, and popular us ages as Well. as to dreams.
In fact, if we look more closely into, the matter, we: must recognize that in employing 
this kind of. substitution the dream-work is doing nothing at all original. For the 
achievement of its purpose, which in this case Is representation without interference 
from the censorship, it simply follows the paths which it finds already marked out in 
unconscious thinking, and gives the preference to those transformations of the repressed 
material which are permitted to become conscious also in the form of witticisms and 
allusions, and with which all the phantasies of neurotics are replete. Here we suddenly 
begin to understand the dream-interpretations of Seherner, whose essential correctness I 
have vindicated elsewhere. The preoccupation of the imagination with One's own body is by 
no means peculiar to or characteristic of the dream alone. My analyses have shown me that 
it is constantly found in the unconscious thinking of neurotics, and may be traced back 
to sexual curiosity, whose object, in the adolescent youth or maiden, is ,the genitals of 
the opposite sex, or even of the. same sex. But, as Schemer and Volkelt very truly 
insist, the house does, not constitute the only group of. Ideas which is employed for the 
symbolization of the body, either in dreams or in the unconscious phantasies of neurosis. 
To be sure, I know patients who have steadily adhered to an architectural symbolism for 
the body and the genitals (sexual interest, of course, extends far beyond the region of 
the external genital organs)—patients for whom posts and pillars signify legs (as in 
the Song of Songs), to whom every door suggests a bodily aperture (hole), and every 
water-pipe the urinary system, and so on. But the groups of ideas appertaining to 
plant-life, or to the kitchen, are just, as often chosen to conceal sexual images;¹ in 
respect of the former everyday language, the sediment of imaginative comparisons dating 
from the remotest times, has abundantly paved the way (the vineyard of the Lord, the seed 
of Abra
¹A mass of corroborative material may be found in the three supplementary volumes ..of 
Edward Fuchs's Illustrierte Sittengeschichte; privately printed by A. Lange; Munich. 
ham, the garden of the maiden in the Song of Songs). The ugliest as well as the most 
intimate details of sexual life may be thought or dreamed of in apparently innocent 
allusions to culinary operations, and the symptoms, of hysteria will become absolutely 
unintelligible if we forget that sexual symbolism may conceal itself behind the most 
commonplace and inconspicuous matters as its safest hiding-place. That some neurotic 
children cannot look at blood and raw meat, that they vomit at the, sight of eggs and 
macaroni, and that the dread of snakes, which is natural to mankind, is monstrously 
exaggerated in neurotics—-all this has a definite sexual meaning! Wherever the neurosis 
employs a disguise of this sort, it treads the paths once trodden by the whole of 
humanity in the early stages of civilization—paths to whose thinly veiled existence our 
idiomatic expressions, proverbs, superstitions, and customs testify to this day.
I here insert the promised flower-dream of a female patient,, in which I shall print in 
Roman type everything which is to be sexually interpreted. This beautiful dream lost all 
its charm for the dreamer once it had been interpreted.
(a). Preliminary dream: She goes to the two maids in the kitchen and scolds them for 
taking so long to prepare a little bite of food. She also sees a very large number of 
heavy kitchen utensils in the kitchen, heaped into piles and turned upside down in order 
to drain. Later addition: The two maids go to fetch water, and have, as it were, to climb 
into a river which reaches up to the house or into the courtyard.²
(b) Main dream: ³ She is descending from a height⁴ over curiously constructed 
railings, or a fence which is composed of large square trellis-work hurdles with small 
square apertures.⁵ It is really not adapted for climbing; she is constantly afraid that 
she cannot find a place for her foot, and she is glad that her dress doesn't get caught 
anywhere, and that she is able to climb il so respectably.⁶ As she climbs
²For the interpretation of this preliminary dream, which is to be regarded as causal, 
see p. 266.
³Her career.
⁴Exalted origin, the wish-contrast to the preliminary dream.
⁵A composite formation; which unites two localities, the so-called garret (German: 
Boden="floor," "garret") of her father's house, in which she used to play with her. 
brother, the object of her later phantasies, and the farm of a malicious uncle, who used 
to tease her.
⁶Wish-Contrast to an actual memory of her uncle's farm, to the effect that she used to 
expose herself while she was asleep.

she is carrying a big branch in her hand,¹ really like a tree, which is thickly studded 
with red flowers; a spreading branch, with many twigs.² With this is connected the idea 
of cherry-blossoms (Bluten=flowers), but they look like fully opened camellias, which of 
course do not grow on trees. As she is descending, she first has one, then suddenly two, 
and then again only one.³ When she has reached the ground the lower flowers have already 
begun to fall. Now that she has reached the bottom she sees' an "odd man" who is combing 
as she would like to put it—just such a tree, that is, with a piece of wood he is 
scraping thick bunches of hair from it, which hang from it like moss. Other men have 
chopped off such branches in a garden, and have flung them into the road, where they are 
lying about, so that a number of people take some of them. But she asks whether this is 
right, whether she may take one, too.⁴ In the garden there stands a young man (he is a 
foreigner, and known to her) toward whom she goes in order to ask him how it is possible 
to transplant such branches in her own garden.⁵ He embraces her, whereupon she 
struggles and asks him what he is thinking of, whether it is permissible to embrace her 
in such a manner. He says there is nothing wrong in it, that it is permitted.⁶ He then 
declares himself willing to go with her into the other garden, in order to show her how 
to put them in, and he says something to her which she does not quite understand: 
"Besides this I need three metres (later she says: square metres) or three fathoms of 
ground?' It seems as though he were asking her for something in return for his 
willingness, as though he had the intention of indemnifying (reimbursing) himself in her 
garden, as though he wanted to evade some law of other, to derive some advantage from it 
without causing her an injury. She does not know whether of not he really shows1 her 
anything. 
The above dream, which has been given prominence on account of its symbolic elements, may 
be described as a biographical
¹Just as the angel bears a lily-stem in the Annunciation.
²For the explanation of this composite formation, see p. 268; innocence, menstruation, 
La Dame aux Camelias.
³Referring to the plurality of the persons who serve her phantasies.
⁴Whether it is permissible to masturbate. [Sich einen herunterreissen means "to pull 
off' and colloquially "to masturbate."—TR.]
⁵The branch (Ast) has long been used to represent the male organ, and, moreover, 
contains a very distinct allusion to the family name of the dreamer.,
⁶Refers to matrimonial precautions, as does that which immediately follows.

dream. Such dreams occur frequently in psycho-analysis, but perhaps only rarely outside 
it.⁷ 
I have, of course, an abundance of such material, but.to reproduce it here would lead us 
too far into the consideration of neurotic conditions. Everything points to same 
conclusion, namely, that we need not assume that any special symbolizing activity of the 
psyche is operative in dream-formation; that, on the contrary, the dream makes use of 
such symbolizations as are to be found ready-made in unconscious thinking, since these, 
by reason of their ease of representation, and for the most part by reason of their being 
exempt from the censorship, satisfy more effectively the requirements of dream formation.
E. Representation in Dreams by Symbols: Some Further Typical Dreams
The analysis of the last] biographical; dream shows that I recognized the symbolism in 
dreams, from the very outset. But it was only little by little that I arrived at a full 
appreciation of its extent and significance, as the result of increasing experience, and 
under the influence of the works of W. Stekel, concerning which I may here fittingly say 
something.
This author, who has perhaps injured psycho-analysis as much as he has benefited it 
produced a large number of novel symbolic translations, to which no credence was given at 
first, but most-of; which were: later confirmed and had to be accepted. Stokers services 
are in no way belittled by the remark that the sceptical reserve with which these symbols 
were received was not unjustified. For the examples upon which he based his 
interpretations were often unconvincing, and, moreover^ he employed a method which must 
he rejected as scientifically-unreliable. Stekel found his symbolic meanings-by way of 
intuition, by virtue; of his individual faculty of immediately understanding the symbols. 
But such an art cannot be generally assumed; its efficiency is immune from criticism and 
its results have therefore no claim to credibility. It is as though one were to base 
one's diagnosis of infectious diseases on the olfactory impressions received beside the 
sick-bed, although of course there have been clinicians, to whom the sense of 
smell—atrophied in most people-has been of greater service than to others, and who 
really have been able to diagnose a case of abdominal typhus by their sense of smell.
⁷An analogous biographical dream is recorded on p. 287, among the examples of. dream 
symbolism.
The progressive experience of psycho-analysis has enabled us to discover patients who 
have displayed in a surprising degree this immediate understanding of dream-symbolism. 
Many of these patients suffered from dementia praecox, so that for a time there was an 
inclination to suspect that all dreamers with such an understanding of symbols were 
suffering: from that disorder. But this did not prove to be the case; it is simply a 
question of a personal gift or idiosyncrasy without perceptible pathological significance.
When one has familiarized oneself with the extensive employment of symbolism for the 
representation of sexual material in dreams, one naturally asks oneself whether many of 
these symbols have not a permanently established meaning, like the signs in shorthand; 
and one even thinks of attempting to compile a new dream-book on the lines of the cipher 
method. In this connection it should be noted that symbolism does not appertain 
especially to dreams, but rather to the unconscious imagination, and particularly to that 
of the people, and it is to be found in a more developed condition in folklore, myths, 
legends, idiomatic phrases, proverbs, and the current witticisms of a people than in 
dreams, We should have, therefore, to go far beyond the province of dream-interpretation 
in order fully to investigate the meaning of symbolism, and to discuss the numerous 
problems—for the most part still un solved—which are associated with the concept of 
the symbol.¹ We shall here confine ourselves to saying that representation by a symbol 
comes under the heading of the indirect representations, but that we are warned by all 
sorts of signs against indiscriminately classing symbolic representation with the other 
modes of indirect representation before we have clearly conceived its distinguishing 
characteristics. In a number of cases, the common quality shared by the symbol and the 
thing which it represents is obvious; in others, it is concealed; in these latter cases 
the choice of the symbol appears to be enigmatic. And these are the very cases that must 
be able to elucidate the ultimate meaning of the symbolic relation; they point to the 
fact that it is of a genetic nature. What is today
¹Cf. the works of Bleuler and his Zurich disciples, Maeder, Abraham, and others, and of 
the non-medical authors (Kleinpaul and others) to whom they refer. But the most pertinent 
things that have been said on the subject will be found in the work of O. Rank and H. 
Sachs, Die Bedeutung der Psychoanalyse fur die Geisteswissenschaft, (1913), chap, i; also 
E. Jones, Die Theorie der Symbolik Intern. Zeitschr. fur Psychoanalyse, v. (1-919).
symbolically connected was probably united, in primitive times, by conceptual and 
linguistic identity.² The symbolic relationship seems to be a residue and reminder of a 
former identity. It may also be noted that in many cases the symbolic identity extends 
beyond the linguistic identity, as had already been asserted by Schubert (1814).³
Dreams employ this symbolism to give a disguised representation to their latent thoughts. 
Among the symbols thus employed there are, of course, many which constantly, or all but 
constantly, mean the same thing. But we must bear in mind the curious plasticity of 
psychic material. Often enough a symbol in the dream content may have to be interpreted 
not symbolically but in accordance with its proper meaning; at other times the dreamer, 
having to deal with special memory-material, may take the law into his own hands and 
employ anything whatever as a sexual symbol, though it is not generally so employed. 
Wherever he has the choice of several symbols for the representation of a dream-content, 
he will decide in favour of that symbol which is in addition objectively related to his 
other thought-material; that is to say, he will employ an individual motivation besides 
the typically valid one.
Although since Schemer's time the more recent investigations of dream-problems have 
definitely established the existence of dream-symbolism—even Havelock Ellis 
acknowledges that our dreams are indubitably full of symbols—it must yet be admitted 
that the existence of symbols in dreams has not only facilitated dream-interpretation, 
but has also made it more difficult. The technique of interpretation in accordance with 
the dreamer's free associations more often than otherwise leaves us in the lurch as far 
as the symbolic elements of the dream-content are concerned. A return to the 
arbitrariness of dream-interpretation as it was
²This conception would seem to find an extraordinary confirmation in a theory advanced 
by Hans Sperber ("Uber den Einfluss sexueller momente auf Entstehung und Entwicklung der 
Sprache," in Imago, i. [1912]). Sperber believes that primitive -words de noted sexual 
things exclusively, and subsequently lost their sexual significance and were applied to 
other things and activities, which were compared with the sexual.
³For example, a ship sailing on the sea may appear in the urinary dreams of Hungarian 
dreamers, despite the fact that the term of to ship, for to urinate, is foreign to this 
language (Ferenczi). In the dreams of the French and the other romance peoples room 
serves as a symbolic representation for woman, although these peoples have nothing 
analogous to the German Frauenzimmer. Many symbols are as old as language itself, while 
others are continually being coined (e.g., the aeroplane, the Zeppelin).

practised in antiquity, and is seemingly revived by Stekel’s wild, interpretations, is 
contrary to scientific method. Consequently, those elements in the dream-content which 
are to be symbolically regarded compel us to employ a combined technique, which on the 
one hand is based on the dreamer's associations, while on the other hand the missing 
portions have to be supplied by the interpreter's understanding of the symbols. Critical 
circumspection in the solution of the symbols must coincide with careful study of the 
symbols in especially transparent examples of dreams in order to silence the reproach of 
arbitrariness in dream-interpretation. The uncertainties which still adhere to our 
function as dream-interpreters are due partly to our imperfect knowledge (which, however, 
can be progressively increased) and partly to certain peculiarities of the dream-symbols 
themselves. These often possess many and varied meanings, so that, as in Chinese script, 
only the context can furnish the correct meaning. This multiple significance of the 
symbol is allied to the dream's faculty of admitting over-interpretations, of 
representing, in the same content, various wish-impulses and thought-formations, often of 
a widely divergent character.
After these limitations and reservations, I will proceed. The Emperor and the Empress 
(King and Queen)¹ in most cases really represent the dreamer's parents; the dreamer 
himself or herself is the prince or princess. But the high authority conceded to the 
Emperor is also conceded to great men, so that in some dreams, for example, Goethe 
appears as a father symbol (Hitschmann).—All elongated objects, sticks, tree-trunks, 
umbrellas (on account of the opening, which might be likened to an erection), all sharp 
and elongated weapons, knives, daggers, and pikes, represent the male member. A frequent, 
but not very intelligible symbol for the same is a nail-file (a reference to rubbing and 
scraping?).—Small boxes, chests, cup boards, and ovens correspond to the female organ; 
also cavities, ships, and all kinds of vessels.-—A room in a dream generally represents 
a woman; the description of its various entrances and exits is scarcely calculated to 
make us doubt this interpretation.² The interest
¹In the U.S.A. the father is represented in dreams as the President, and even more often 
as the Governor —a title which is frequently applied to the parent in everyday 
life.—TR.
²"A patient living in a boarding-house dreams that he meets one of the servants, and 
asks her what her number is; to his surprise she answers: 14. He has, in fact, entered 
into relations with the girl in question, and has often had her in his bedroom. She 
feared, as may be imagined, that the landlady suspected her, and had proposed, on the day 
before the dream, that they should meet in one of the unoccupied rooms. In reality this 
room had the number 14, while in the dream the woman bore this number. A clearer proof of 
the identification of woman and room, could hardly be imagined," (Ernest Jones, Intern. 
Zeitschr. f. Psycho-analyse, ii, [1914]). (Cf. Artemidorus, The Symbolism of Dreams 
[German version by F. S. Krauss, Vienna, 1881, p. 110]: "Thus, for example, the bedroom 
signifies the wife, supposing one to be in the house.")

as to whether the room is open or locked will he readily understood in this connection. 
(Cf. Dora's dream in Fragment of an Analysis of Hysteria.) There is no need to be 
explicit as to the sort of key that will unlock the room; the symbolism of lock and key 
has been gracefully if broadly employed by Uhland in his song of the Graf 
Eberstein.—The dream of walking through a suite of rooms .signifies a brothel or a 
harem. But, as H. Sachs has shown by an admirable example, it is also employed to 
represent marriage (contrast). An interesting relation to the sexual investigations of 
child hood emerges when the dreamer dreams of two rooms which were previously one, or 
finds that a familiar room in a house of which he dreams has been divided into two, or 
the reverse. In childhood the female genitals and anus (the "behind")³ are conceived of 
as a single opening according to the infantile cloaca theory, and only later is it 
discovered that this region of the body contains two separate cavities and openings. 
Steep inclines, ladders and stairs, and going up or down them, are symbolic 
representations of the sexual act.⁴ Smooth walls over which one climbs, fagades of 
houses across which one lets oneself down—often with a sense of great 
anxiety—correspond to erect human bodies, and probably repeat in our dreams childish 
memories of climbing up parents or nurses. Smooth walls are men; in anxiety dreams one 
often holds firmly to projections on houses. Tables, whether bare or covered, and boards, 
are women, perhaps by virtue of contrast, since they have no protruding contours. Wood 
generally speaking, seems, in accordance with its linguistic relations, to represent 
feminine matter (Materie). The name of the island Madeira means wood in Portuguese. Since 
bed and board (mensa et thorus) constitute marriage, in dreams the latter is often 
substituted for the former, and as far as practicable the sexual representation-complex 
is transposed to the eating-complex.—Of ar-
³Cf. "the cloaca theory" in Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex.	⁴See p. 123-124 
above.
ticles of dress, a woman's hat may very often be interpreted with certainty as the male 
genitals. In the dreams of men, one often finds the necktie as a symbol for the penis; 
this is not only because neckties hang down in front of the body, and are characteristic 
of men, but also because one can select them at pleasure, a freedom which nature 
prohibits as regards the Original of the symbol. Persons who make use of this symbol in 
dreams are very extravagant in the matter of ties, and possess whole collections of 
them.¹ All complicated machines and appliances are very probably the genitals—as a 
rule the male genitals—in the description of which the symbolism of dreams is as 
indefatigable as human wit. It is quite unmistakable that all weapons and tools are used 
as symbols for the male organ: e.g., ploughshare, hammer, gun, revolver, dagger, sword, 
etc. Again, many of the landscapes seen in dreams, especially those that contain bridges 
or wooded mountains, may be readily recognized as descriptions of the genitals. 
Marcinowski collected a series of examples in which the dreamer explained his dream by 
means of drawings, in order to represent the landscapes and places appearing in it. These 
drawings clearly showed the distinction between the manifest and the latent meaning of 
the dream. Whereas, naively regarded, they seemed to represent plans, maps, and so forth, 
closer investigation snowed that they were representations of the human body, of the 
genitals, etc., and only after conceiving them thus could the dream be understood.² 
Finally, where one finds incomprehensible neologisms one may suspect combinations of 
components having a sexual significance.—Children, too, often signify the genitals, 
since men and women are in the habit of fondly referring to their genital organs as 
little man, little woman, little thing. The little brother was correctly recognized by 
Stekel as the penis. To play with or to beat a little child is often the dream's 
representation of masturbation. The dream-work represents castration by baldness, 
hair-cutting, the loss of teeth, and beheading. As an insurance against castration, the 
dream uses one of the common
¹Cf. in the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, ii, 675, the drawing of a nineteen-year-old 
manic patient: a man with a snake as a neck-tie, which is turning to wards a girl. Also 
the story Der Schamhaftige (Anthropophyteia, vi, 334): A woman entered a bathroom, and 
there came face to face with a man who hardly had time to put on his shirt. He was 
greatly embarrassed, but at once covered his throat with the front of his shirt, and 
said: "Please excuse me, I have no necktie.”
²Cf. Pfister's works on cryptography and picture-puzzles.

symbols of the penis in double or multiple form; and the appearance in a dream of a 
lizard—an animal whose tail, if pulled off, is regenerated by a new growth—has the 
same meaning. Most of those animals which are utilized as genital symbols in mythology 
and folklore play this part also in dreams: the fish, the snail, the cat, the mouse (on 
account of the hairiness of the genitals), but above all the snake, which is the most 
important symbol of the male member. Small animals and vermin are substitutes for little 
children, e.g., undesired sisters or brothers. To be infected with vermin is often, the 
equivalent for pregnancy.—As a very recent symbol of the male organ I may mention the 
airship, whose employment is justified by its relation to flying, and also, occasionally, 
by its form.—Stekel has given a number of other symbols, not yet sufficiently verified, 
which he has -. illustrated by examples. The works of this author, and especially his 
book: Die Sprache des Traumes, contain the richest collection of interpretations of 
symbols, some of which were ingeniously guessed and were proved to be correct upon 
investigation, as, for example, in the section on the symbolism of death. The author's 
lack of critical reflection, and his tendency to generalize at all costs, make his 
interpretations doubtful or inapplicable, so that in making use of his works caution is 
urgently advised. I shall there fore restrict myself to mentioning a few examples.
Right and left, according to Stekel, are to be understood in dreams in an ethical sense. 
"The right-hand path always signifies the way to righteousness, the left-hand path the 
path to crime. Thus the left may signify homosexuality, incest, and perversion, while the 
right signifies marriage, relations with a prostitute, etc. The meaning is always 
determined by the individual moral standpoint of the dreamer" (loc. cit., p. 466). 
Relatives in dreams generally stand for the genitals (p. 473). Here I can confirm this 
meaning only for the son, the daughter, and the younger sister—-that is, wherever 
little thing could be employed. On the other hand, verified examples allow us to 
recognize sisters as symbols of the breasts, and brothers as symbols of the larger 
hemispheres. To be unable to overtake a carriage is interpret ed by Stekel as regret at 
being unable to catch up with a difference hi age (p. 479). The luggage of a traveller is 
the burden of sin by which one is oppressed (ibid.) But a traveller's luggage often 
proves to be an unmistakable symbol of one’s own genitals. To numbers, which frequently 
occur in dreams, Stekel has assigned a fixed symbolic meaning but these interpretations 
:seem neither sufficiently, verified nor of universal validity, although in individual 
cases they can usually be recognized as plausible. We have, at all events, abundant 
confirmation that the figure three is a symbol of the male genitals. One of Stekel's 
generalizations refers to the double meaning of the genital symbols. "Where is there a 
symbol,'' he asks, “which (if in any way permitted by the imagination) may not be used 
simultaneously in the masculine and the feminine sense?" To be sure, the clause in 
parenthesis retracts much of the absolute character of this assertion, for this double 
meaning is not always permitted by the imaginations Stilly think it is not superfluous to 
state that in my experience this general statement of Stekel's requires .elaborations 
Besides those symbols which are just as frequently employed for the male as fort the 
female genitals, there are-:others which preponderantly, or almost exclusively, designate 
one of the sexes, and there are yet others which so far as we know, have only the male or 
only the female signification. To use long, stiff objects and weapons as symbols of the 
female genitals, Or hollow objects (chests, boxes, etc.,) as symbols of the male 
genitals, is certainly not permitted by the imagination.
It is true that the tendency of dreams, and of the unconscious phantasy, to employ the 
sexual symbols bisexually, reveals art archaic trait, for in childhood the difference in 
the genitals, is unknown, and the same genitals are  attributed to both sexes. One may 
also be misled, as regards; the1significance of; a bisexual; symbol if one forgets the 
fact that  in some dreams a general reversal both sexes takes place, so that the male 
organ is represented by the female and vice versa., Such dreams express, for example, the 
wish of a woman to be a man.
The genitals may even be' represented in dreams by other parts of: the body: the male 
member by the hand or the foot, the female genital orifice: by the mouth; the .ear, or 
even the eye. The secretions of the human body— mucus, tears, urine, semen etc.—may= 
be used in dreams interchangeably. This; statement of Stekel's, correct in the main, has 
suffered a justifiable critical restriction; as the result of certain comments of R. 
Reitler's (Internat,:Zeitschr. fur Psych., i, 1913)., The gist of the matter is-the 
replacement of an important secretion, such as the semen, by an indifferent one.
These very incomplete indications may suffice to stimulate others to make a more 
painstaking collection.¹ I have attempted a much more detailed account of 
dream-symbolism in my General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis.
I shall now append a few instances of the use of such symbols, which will show how 
impossible it is to arrive at the interpretation of a dream if one excludes 
dream-symbolism, but also how in many cases it is imperatively forced upon one. At the 
same time, I must expressly warn the investigator against overestimating the importance 
of symbols in the interpretation of dreams, restricting the work of dream-translation to 
the translation of symbols, and neglecting the technique of utilizing the associations of 
the dreamer. The two techniques of dream-interpretation must supplement one another; 
practically, however, as well as theoretically, precedence is retained by the latter 
process, which assigns the final significance, to the utterances of the dreamer, while 
the symbol-translation which we undertake play an auxiliary part. 
1. The hat as the symbol of a man (of the male genitals).² (A fragment from the dream of 
a young woman who suffered from agoraphobia as the result of her fear of temptation.)
I am walking in the street in summer; I am wearing a straw hat of peculiar shape, the 
middle piece of which is bent upwards, while the side pieces hang downwards (here the 
description hesitates), and in such a fashion that one hangs lower than the other. I am 
cheerful and in a confident mood, and as I pass a number of young officers I think to 
myself: you can’t do anything to me.
As she could produce to associations to he hat, I said to her: "The hat is really a male 
genital organ, with its raised middle piece, and the two downward-hanging side pieces.'' 
It is perhaps peculiar that her hat should be supposed to be a  man, but after all one 
says.: Unter die Haube kommem (to get under the cap.) when we, mean: to get married. I 
intentionally refrained from interpreting the details concerning the unequal dependence 
of the two side pieces, although the determination of just such details must point the 
way to the inter-
¹In spite of all the differences between Schemer's conception of dream-symbolism and; 
the; one developed here, I must still insist that Scherner should be recognized as the 
true discoverer of symbolism in dreams, and that the, experience of psycho-analysis has 
brought his book (published in 1861) into posthumous repute.
²From "Nachtrage zur Traumdeutung" in Zentral blatt fur Psychoanalyse,i, Nos. 5 and 6, 
(1911).

pretation. I went on to say that if, therefore, she had a husband with such splendid 
genitals she would not have to fear the officers; that is, she would have nothing to wish 
from them, for it was essentially her temptation-phantasies Which prevented her from 
going about unprotected and unaccompanied. This last explanation of her anxiety I had 
already been able to give her repeatedly on the basis of other material.
It is quite remarkable how the dreamer behaved after this interpretation. She withdrew 
her description of the hat and would not admit that she had said that the two side pieces 
were hanging down. I was, however, too sure of what I Iiad heard to allow myself to be 
misled, and so I insisted that she did say it. She was quiet for a while, and then found 
the courage to ask why it was that one of her husband's testicles was lower than the 
other, and whether it was the same with all men. With this the peculiar detail of the hat 
was explained, and the whole interpretation was accepted by her. 
The hat symbol was familiar to me long before the patient related this dream. From other 
but less transparent cases I believed that I might assume the hat could also stand for 
the female genitals.¹
2. The little one as the genital organ. Being run over as a symbol of sexual intercourse. 
(Another dream of the same agoraphobic patient.)
Her mother sends away her little daughter so that she has to go alone. She then drives 
with her mother to the railway station, and sees her little one walking right along the 
track) so that she is bound to be run over. She hears the bones crack (At this she 
experiences a feeling of discomfort but no real horror.) She then looks out through the 
carriage window, to see whether the parts cannot be seen behind. Then she reproaches her 
mother for allowing the little one to go out alone.
Analysis.—It is not an easy matter to. Give here a complete interpretation of the 
dream. It forms part of a cycle of dreams, and can be fully understood only in connection 
with the rest. For it is not easy to obtain the material necessary to demonstrate the 
symbolism in a sufficiently isolated condition. The patient at first finds that the 
railway journey is to be interpreted historically as an allusion to a de-
¹Cf. Kirchgraber for a similar example {Zentral blatt fur Psychoanalyse, iii, [1912], p. 
95). Stekel reported a dream in which the hat with an obliquely standing feather in the 
middle symbolized the (impotent) man.
parture from a sanatorium for nervous diseases, with whose director she was, of course, 
in love. Her mother fetched her away, and before her departure the physician came to the 
railway station and gave her a bunch of flowers; she felt uncomfortable because her 
mother witnessed this attention. Here the mother, therefore, appears as the disturber of 
her tender feelings, a role actually played by this strict woman during her daughter's 
girlhood.—The next association referred to the sentence: She then looks to see whether 
the parts cannot be seen behind. In the dream-facade one would naturally be compelled to 
think of the pieces of the little daughter who had been run over and crushed. The- 
association, however, turns in quite a different direction. She recalls that she once« 
saw-her father in ...the. bath-room, naked, from behind; she then begins to talk about 
sex differences, and remarks that in the man the genitals can be seen from behind, but in 
the woman they cannot. In this connection she now herself offers the interpretation that 
the little one is the genital organ, and her little one (she has a four-year-old 
daughter) heir own organ. She reproaches her mother for wanting her to live as though she 
had no genitals, and recognizes this reproach in the introductory sentence of the dream: 
the mother sends her little one away, so that she has to go alone. In her phantasy, going 
alone through streets means having no man, no sexual relations (coire = to go together), 
and this she does not like. According to all her statements, she really suffered as a 
girl through her mother's jealousy, because her father showed a preference for her.
The deeper interpretation of this dream depends upon another dream of-the same night; in 
which the dreamer identifies herself with her brother. She was a tomboy, and was always 
being told that she should have been born a boy. This identification with the brother 
shows with especial clearness that the little one signifies the genital organ. The mother 
threatened him (her) with castration, which could only be understood as a punishment for 
playing with the genital parts, and the identification, therefore, shows that she herself 
had masturbated as a child, though she had retained only a memory of her brother's having 
done so. An early knowledge of the male genitals, which she lost later, must, according 
to the assertions of this second dream, have been acquired at this time. Moreover, the 
second dream points to the infantile sexual theory that girls originate from boys as a 
result of castration. After I had told her of this childish belief, she at once confirmed 
it by an anecdote in which the boy asks the girl: "Was it cut off?" to which the girl 
replies: "No, it's always been like that."
Consequently the sending away of the little one, of the genital organ, in the first dream 
refers also to the threatened castration. Finally, she blames her mother for not having 
borne her as a boy.
That being run over symbolizes sexual inter course would not be evident from this dream 
if we had not learned it from many other
3. Representation of the genitals by buildings, stairs, and shafts. 
(Dream of a young man inhibited by a father complex.)
He is taking a walk with his father in a place which is certainly the Prater, for one can 
see the Rotunda, in front of which there is a small vestibule to which there is attached 
a captive balloon; the balloon, however, seems rather limp. His father asks him what this 
is all for; he is surprised at it, but he explains it to his father. They come into a 
courtyard in which lies a large sheet of tin. His father wants to pull off a big piece of 
this, but first looks round to see if anyone is watching. He tells his father that all he 
needs to do is to speak to the overseer, and then he can take as much as he wants to 
without any more ado. From this courtyard a flight of stairs leads down into a shaft, the 
walls of which are softly upholstered, rather like a leather arm-chair. At the end of 
this shaft there is a long platform, and then a new shaft begins...
Analysis. This dreamer belonged to a type of patient which is not at all promising from a 
therapeutic point of view; up to a certain point in the analysis such patients offer no 
resistance whatever, from that point onwards they prove to be almost inaccessible. This 
dream he analysed almost independently. "The Rotunda," he said, "is my genitals, the 
captive balloon in front is my penis, about whose flaccidity I have been worried." We 
must, however, interpret it in greater detail: the Rotunda is the buttocks, constantly 
associated by the child with the genitals; the smaller structure in front is the scrotum. 
In the dream his father asks him what this is all for—that is, he asks him about the 
purpose and arrangement of the genitals. It is quite evident that this state of affairs 
should be reversed, and that he ought to be the questioner. As such questioning on the 
part of the father never occurred in reality, we must conceive the dream-thought as a 
wish, or perhaps take it conditionally, as follows. "If I had asked my father for sexual 
enlightenment ..." The continuation of this thought we shall presently find in another 
place.
The courtyard in which the sheet of tin is spread out is not to be conceived symbolically 
in the first instance, but originates from his father's place of business. For reasons of 
discretion I have inserted the tin for another material in which the father deals 
without, however, changing anything in the verbal expression of the dream. The dreamer 
had entered his father's business, and had taken a terrible dislike to the somewhat 
questionable practices upon which its profit mainly depended. Hence the continuation of 
the above dream-thought ("if I had asked him") would be: "He would have deceived me just 
as he does his customers." for the pulling off, which serves to represent commercial 
dishonesty, the dreamer himself gives a second explanation, namely, masturbation. This is 
not only quite familiar to us (see above, p. 281), but agrees very well with the fact 
that the secrecy of masturbation is expressed by its opposite (one can do it quite 
openly). Thus, it agrees entirely with our expectations that the autoerotic activity 
should be attributed to the father, just as was the questioning in the first scene of the 
dream. The shaft he at once interprets as the vagina, by referring to the soft 
upholstering of the walls. That the action of coition in the vagina is described as a 
going down instead of in the usual way as a going up agrees with what I have found in 
other instances.¹
The details—that at the end of the first shaft there is a long platform, and then a new 
shaft—he himself explains biographically. He Bad for some time had sexual intercourse 
with women, but had given it up on account of inhibitions, and now hopes to be able to 
begin it again with the aid of treatment. The dream, however, becomes indistinct towards 
the end, and to the experienced interpreter it becomes evident that in the second scene 
of the dream the influence of another subject has already begun" to assert itself; which 
is indicated by his father's business his dishonest practices, and the vagina represented 
by the first shaft, so that one may assume a reference to his mother.
¹Cf. comment in the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, i; and see above, p. 281, note 4.
4. The male argan symbolized by persons and the demale by a landscape.
(Dream of a woman of the lower class, whose husband is a policeman, reported by B. 
Dattner.)
. . . Then someone broke into the house and she anxiously called for a policeman. But he 
went peacefully with two tramps into a church,¹ to which a great many steps led up,² 
behind the church there was a mountain³ on top of which there was a dense forest.⁴ The 
policeman was, provided with a helmet, a gorget,  and a cloak.⁵ The two vagrants, who 
went along with the, policeman quite-peaceably, had sack-like aprons tied round their 
loins.⁶ A road led from the church to the mountain. This road was overgrown on each 
side with grass and brushwood, which became thicker and thicker as it reached the top of  
mountain, where it spread out into quite a forest. 
5. Castration dreams of children.
(a) A boy aged three years and five, months, for whom his father's return from military 
service is clearly inconvenient, wakes one morning in. a, disturbed and excited state, 
and constantly repeats the question: Why did Dad do carry his Mad on a plate? Last night 
Daddy carried his head on a plate.
(b) A student who is now suffering from a severe obsessional neurosis remembers that in 
his sixth year he repeatedly had they following dream: He goes to the barber to, have his 
hair cut. Then a large woman with severe features comes up to him and cuts off his head. 
He recognizes the woman as his mother. 
6. A modified staircase dream.
To one of my patients, a sexual abstainer, who was very ill, whose phantasy was fixated 
upon his mother, and who repeatedly dreamed of climbing; stairs while accompanied by his 
mother, I once remarked that moderate masturbation would probably have been less harmful 
to him than his. enforced abstinence. The influence of this remark, provoked the 
following dream: 
His piano teacher reproaches him for neglecting his piano-playing,, and J or>not 
practicing the Etudes of Moscheles and Clementi’s Gradus ad Parnassum. With; reference 
to this he remarked that the Gradus, too, is a stair-
¹Or Chapel=vagina.
²Symbol of coitus.
³Mons Veneris.
⁴Crines pubis.
⁵Demons in cloaks and hoods are, according to the explanation  of a specialist, of a 
phallic character. 
⁶The two halves of the scrotum.
Way, and that the piano itself is a stairway, as it has a scale.
It may be said that there is no class of ideas which cannot be enlisted in the 
representation of sexual facts and wishes.
7. The sensation of reality and the representation of repetition.
A man, now thirty-five, relates a clearly remembered dream which he claims have had when 
he was four years of age:  The notary with whom his father's will was deposited- he had 
lost his father at the age of three— brought two large Emperor-pears, of which he was 
given one to eat. The other lay on the window-sill of the living-room. He woke with the 
conviction of the reality of what he had dreamt, and obstinately asked his mother to give 
him the second pear it was, he said, still lying on the window-sill. His mother laughed 
at this.
Analysis. The notary was a jovial old gentleman who, as he seems to remember really 
sometimes brought pears with; him. The window-sill was as he saw it in the dream. Nothing 
else occurs to him in this connection, except, perhaps, that his mother has recently told 
him a dream. She has two birds, sitting on her head; she wonders when they will fly away, 
but they do not fly away, and one of them flies to her mouth and sucks at it.
The dreamer's inability to furnish associations. justifies the attempt, to interpret it 
by the substitution of symbols. The two pears-pommes ou poires—are the breasts of the 
mother who nursed him; the window-sill is the projection of the bosom, analogous to the 
balconies in the dream of houses. His sensation of reality after waking is justified, for 
his mother had actually suckled him for much longer than the customary term, and her 
breast was still available. The dream is to be translated: "Mother, give (show) me the 
breast again at which I once used to drink" The once is represented by the eating of the 
one pear, the again by the desire for the other. The temporal repetition pi an act is 
habitually represented in dreams by the numerical multiplication of an object.
It is naturally a very striking phenomenon that symbolism should already play a part in 
the dream of a child of four, but this is the rule rather than the exception. One may say 
that the dreamer has command of symbolism from the very first. 
The early age at which people make use: of symbolic the presentation, even apart from the 
dream-life, may be shown by the following uninfluenced memory of a lady who is now 
twenty-seven: She is in her fourth year. The nursemaid is driving her, with her brother, 
eleven months younger, and a cousin, who is between the two in age, to the lavatory, so 
that they can do their little business there before going for their walk. As the oldest, 
she sits on the seat and the other two on chambers. She asks her (female) cousin: Have 
you a purse, too? Walter has a little sausage, I have a purse. The cousin answers: Yes, I 
have a purse, too. The nursemaid listens, laughing, and relates the conversation to the 
mother, whose reaction is a sharp reprimand.
Here a dream may be inserted whose excellent symbolism permitted of interpretation with 
little assistance from the dreamer:
8. The question of symbolism in the dreams of normal persons.¹
An objection frequently raised by the opponents of psycho-analysis—and recently also by 
Havelock Ellis²—is that, although dream-symbolism may perhaps be a product of the 
neurotic psyche, it has no validity whatever in the case of normal persons. But while 
psycho-analysis recognizes no essential distinctions, but only quantitative differences, 
between the psychic life of the normal person and that of the neurotic, the analysis of 
those dreams in which, in sound and sick persons alike, the repressed complexes display 
the same activity; reveals the absolute identity of the mechanisms as well as of the 
symbolism. Indeed, the natural dreams of healthy persons often contain a much simpler, 
more transparent, and more characteristic symbolism than those of neurotics, which, owing 
to the greater, strict ness of the censorship and the more extensive dream-distortion 
resulting therefrom, are frequently troubled and obscured, and are therefore more 
difficult to translate. The following dream serves to illustrate this fact. This dream 
comes from a non-neurotic girl of a rather prudish and reserved type. In the course of 
conversation I found that she was engaged to be married, but that there were hinderances 
in the way of the marriage which threatened to postpone it. She related spontaneously the 
following dream:
I arrange the centre of a table with flowers for a birthday. On being questioned she 
states that in the dream she seemed to be at home
¹Alfred Robitsek in the Zentralblatt, fur Psycho-analyse; ii (1911), p. 340.
²The World of Dreams, London (1911), p. 168.

(she has no home at the time).and experienced a feeling of happiness.
The popular symbolism enables me to translate the dream or myself. It is the expression 
of her wish to be married: the table, with the flowers in the centre, is symbolic of 
herself and her genitals. She represents her future wishes as fulfilled, inasmuch as she 
is already occupied with the thoughts of the birth of a child; so the wedding has taken 
place long ago.
I call her attention to the fact that the centre of a table is an unusual expression, 
which she admits; but here, of course, I cannot question her more directly. I carefully 
refrain from suggesting to her the meaning of the symbols, and ask her only for the 
thoughts which occur to her mind in connection with the individual parts of the dream. In 
the course of the analysis her reserve gave way to a distinct interest in the 
interpretation, and a frankness which was made possible by the serious tone of the 
conversation. To my question as to what kind pf flowers they had been, her first answer 
is: violets, and pinks or carnations. I took the word lily in this dream In its popular 
sense; as a symbol of chastity; she confirmed this, as purity occurred to her in 
association with lily. Valley is a common feminine dream-symbol. The chance juxtaposition 
of the two symbols in the name of the flower is made into a piece of dream-symbolism, and 
serves to emphasize the preciousness of her v\r%\n\ty—expensive flowers; one has to pay 
for them—and expresses the expectation that her husband will know how to appreciate its 
value. The comment, expensive flowers, etc. has, as will be shown, a different meaning in 
every One of the three different flower-symbols.
I thought of what seemed to me a venture some explanation of the hidden meaning of the 
apparently quite asexual word violets by an unconscious relation to the French viol. But 
to my surprise the dreamer's association was the English word violate. The accidental 
phonetic similarity of the two words violet and violate is utilized by the dream to 
express in the language of flowers the idea of the violence of defloration (another word 
which makes use of flower-symbolism), and perhaps also to give, expression to a 
masochistic tendency on the part pf the girl. An excellent example of the word bridges 
across which run the paths to the unconscious. One has to pay for them here means life, 
with which she has to pay for be coming a wife and a mother.
In association with pinks, which she then calls carnations, I think of carnal. But her as 
sociation is colour, to which she adds that car nations are the flowers which her fiance 
gives her frequently and in large quantities. At the end of the conversation she suddenly 
admits, spontaneously, that she has not told me the truth; the word that occurred to her 
was not colour, but incarnation, the very word I expected. Moreover, even the word colour 
is not a remote association; it was determined by the meaning of carnation (i.e., 
flesh-colour)—that is, by the complex. This lack of honesty shows that the resistance 
here is at its greatest be cause the symbolism is here most transparent, and the struggle 
between libido and re pression is most intense in connection with this phallic theme. The 
remark that these flowers were often given her by her fiance is, together with the double 
meaning of carnation, a still further indication of their phallic significance in the 
dream. The occasion of the present of flowers during the day is employed to express the 
thought of a sexual present and a return present. She gives her virginity and expects in 
return for it a rich love-life. But the words: expensive flowers; one has to pay for them 
may have a real, financial meaning. The flower-symbolism in the dream thus comprises the 
virginal female, the male symbol, and the reference to violent defloration. It is to be 
noted that sexual flower-symbolism, which, of course, is very widespread, symbolizes the 
human sexual organs by flowers, the sexual organs of plants; indeed, presents. of flowers 
between lovers may have this unconscious significance.
The birthday for which she is making preparations in the dream probably signifies the 
birth of a child, She identifies herself with the bride groom, and represents him 
preparing her for a birth (having coitus with her). It is as though the latent thought 
were to say: "If I were he, I would not wait, but I would deflower the bride without 
asking her; I would use violence." Indeed, the word violate points to this. Thus even the 
sadistic libidinal components find expression.
In a deeper stratum of the dream the sentence I arrange, etc., probably has an auto 
erotic, that is, an infantile significance. 
She also has a knowledge—possibly only in the dream—of her physical need; she sees 
herself flat like a table, so that she emphasizes all the more her virginity, the 
costliness of the centre (another time she calls it a centre-piece of flowers). Even the 
horizontal element of the table may contribute something to the symbol. The concentration 
of the dream is worthy of remark; nothing is superfluous, every word is a symbol.
Later on she brings me a supplement to this dream: I decorate the flowers with green 
crinkled paper, She adds that it was fancy paper of the sort which is used to disguise 
ordinary flower-pots. She says also: "To hide untidy things, whatever was to be seen 
which was not pretty to the eye; there is a gap, a little space in the flowers. The paper 
looks like velvet or moss." With decorate she associates decorum, as I expected. The 
green colour is very prominent, and with this she associates hope, yet another reference 
to pregnancy. In this part of the dream the identification with the man is not the 
dominant feature, but thoughts of shame and frankness express them selves. She makes 
herself beautiful for him; she admits physical defects, of which she is ashamed and which 
she wishes to correct. The associations velvet and moss distinctly point to crines pubis.
The dream is an expression of thoughts hardly known to the waking state of the girl; 
thoughts which deal with the love of the senses and its organs; she is prepared for a 
birth-day, i.e., she has coitus; the fear of defloration and perhaps the pleasurably 
toned pain find expression; she admits her physical defects and overcompensates them by 
means of an over-estimation of the value of her virginity. Her shame excuses the emerging 
sensuality by the fact that the aim of it all is the child. Even material considerations, 
which are foreign to the lover, find expression here. The affect of the simple 
dream—the feeling of bliss—shows that here strong emotional complexes have found 
satisfaction. 
I close with the 
9. Dream of a chemist. 
(A young man who has been trying to give up his habit of masturbation by substituting 
intercourse with a woman.)
Preliminary statement: On the day before the dream he had been instructing a student as 
"to Grignard}s reaction, in which magnesium is dissolved in absolutely pure ether under 
the catalytic influence of iodine. Two days earlier there had been an explosion in the 
course of the same reaction, in which someone had burned his hand.
Dream I. He is-going to make phenylmagne-siumbromide; he sees the apparatus with 
particular distinctness, but he has substituted himself for the magnesium. He is now in a 
curious, wavering attitude. He keeps on repeating to himself: "This is the right thing, 
it is working, my feet are beginning to dissolve, and my knees are getting soft." Then he 
reaches down and feels for his feet, and meanwhile (he does not know how) he takes his 
legs out of the carboy, and then again he says to himself: "That can't be . . . Yes, it 
has been done correctly.” Then he partially wakes, and repeats the dream to himself, 
because he wants to tell it to me. He is positively afraid of the analysis of the dream. 
He is much excited during this state of semi-sleep, and repeats continually: "Phenyl, 
phenyl."
II. He is in . . . with his whole family. He is supposed to be at the Schottentor at 
half-past eleven in order to keep an appointment with the, lady in question] but he does 
not wake until half-past eleven. He says to himself: "It is too late now; when you get 
there it will be half-past twelve." The next moment he sees the whole family gathered 
about the table— his mother and the parlourmaid with the soup-tureen with peculiar 
distinctness. Then he says to himself: "Well, if we are sitting down to eat already, I 
certainly can't get away.”
Analysis. He feels, 'sure that- even the first dream contains a reference to the lady 
whom he is to meet at the place of rendezvous (the dream Was dreamed during the night 
before the expected meeting). The student whom he was instructing is a particularly 
unpleasant fellow; the chemist had said to him: "That isn't right, because the magnesium 
was still unaffected," and the student had answered, as though he were quite unconcerned: 
"Nor it is." He himself must be this student; he is as in different to his analysis as 
the student is to his synthesis; the he in the dream, however, who performs the 
operation, is myself. How unpleasant he must seem to me with his in difference to the 
result!
Again, he is the material with which the analysis (synthesis) is made. For the question 
is the success Of the treatment. The legs in the dream recall an impression of the 
previous evening. He met a lady at a dancing class of whom he wished to make a conquest 
he pressed her to him so closely-that she once cried out. As he ceased to press her legs 
he felt her firm, responding pressure' against his lower thighs as far as just above the 
knees; the spot mentioned in the dream. In this situation,, then, the woman is the 
magnesium in the retort, which is at last working. He is feminine towards me, as he is 
virile towards the woman. If he succeeds with the-woman, the treatment will also succeed. 
Feeling himself and becoming; aware of his knees refers to masturbation, and corresponds 
to his fatigue of the previous day . . . The rendezvous had actually been made for 
half-past eleven. His wish to oversleep himself and to keep to his sexual object at home 
(that is, masturbation) corresponds to his resistance.
He says, in respect to the repetition of the name phenyl, that all these1radicals ending 
in yl have always been pleasing to him; they are very convenient to use v. benzyl, 
acetyl, etc. That, however, explained nothing. But when I proposed the foot Schlemihl he 
laughed heartily, and told me that during^ the summer he had read a book by Prevost which 
contained a chapters "Les exclus de I’amour,"' and in this there was some mention of 
Schlemilies; and in reading- of these outcasts he said to himself: "That is my case;'' He 
would have placed the Schlemihl if he had missed the appointment.
It seems that the sexual symbolism of dreams has already been directly-confirmed by 
experiment. In 1912 Dr. K. Schrotter; at the instance of H. Sweboda, produced dreams in 
deeply hypnotized persons by suggestions which determined a large part of the 
dream-content. If the suggestion proposed that the subject should dream of normal or 
abnormal sexual relations, the dream carried but these1 orders by replacing sexual 
material by the symbols with which psycho-analytic dream-interpretation has made us 
familiar. Thus, following the suggestion that the dreamer should dream of homosexual 
relations with a lady friend, this friend appeared in the dream carrying a shabby 
travelling-bag, upon which there was a label with the printed words: "For ladies only." 
The dreamer was believed never to have heard of dream-symbolization or of 
dream-interpretation. Unfortunately, the value of this important investigation Was 
diminished by the fact that Dr. Schrotter shortly afterwards committed suicide. Of his 
dream-experiments he gave us only a preliminary report in the Zentralblatt fur 
Psychoanalyse.
Similar results were reported in 1923 by G. Roffenstein: Especially interesting were the 
experiments, performed by, Betlheim and Hartmann, because they eliminated hypnosis. These 
authors told stories of a crude sexual content to confused patients suffering from 
Korsakoff's psychosis, and observed the distortions which appeared when the material 
related was reproduced.¹ It was shown that, the reproduced material contained symbols 
made familiar by the interpretation of dreams (climbing stairs, stabbing and shooting as 
symbols: of coitus, knives and cigarettes as symbols of the penis). Special value was 
attached to the appearance of the ^symbol of climbing stairs, for, as the authors justly 
observed, "a symbolization of this sort could not be effected by a conscious wish to 
distort." 
Only when we have formed a due estimate of the importance of symbolism in dreams can we 
continue the study if the typical dreams which was interrupted in an earlier chapter (p. 
248). I feel justified in dividing these dreams roughly into two classes; first, those 
which always really have the same meaning, and second, those which despite the same or a 
similar content must nevertheless be given the most varied interpretations.; Of the 
typical dreams belonging to the first class I have already dealt fairly fully with the 
examination dream.
On account of their similar affective character, the breams of missing a train deserve to 
be ranked with the, examination-dreams; more over their interpretation justifies this 
approximation. They are consolation-dreams, directed against another anxiety, perceived 
in dreams- the fear of death. To depart is one of the most frequent and one of-the 'most 
readily established of the death symbols. The dream therefore says consolingly: "Reassure 
yourself, you are not going to die (to depart)," just as the examination-dream calms us 
by saying: "Don’t bet afraid; this time, too, nothing will: happen to you." The 
difficulty is understanding both kinds of dreams is due. to the fact that the anxiety is 
attached precisely to the expression of consolation. 
The meaning of the dreams due to dental stimulus, which I have often- enough had to 
analyse in my patients escaped me for a long time because, much to my astonishment, they 
habitually offered too great a resistance to interpretation. But finally an overwhelming 
mass of evidence convinced me that in: the case, of men nothing other than the 
masturbatory desires of puberty furnish the motive power, of these; dreams. I shall 
analyse, two such dreams, one pf which is; also a flying dream. The two
¹“Uber Fehreaktionen bei der Korsakoffscher, Psychose,” Arch. F. Psychiatrie, Vol. 
LXXH (1924).
dreams were dreamed by the same person—-a young man of pronounced homosexuality which, 
however, has been inhibited in life.
He is witnessing a performance of Fidelio from the stalls of the operahouse; he is 
sitting next to L, whose personality is congenial to him, and whose friendship he would 
like to have. Suddenly he flies diagonally right across the stalls; he then puts his hand 
in his mouth and draws out two of his teeth.
He himself describes the flight by saying that it was as though he were thrown into the 
air. As the opera performed was Fidelio, be Recalls the words:
He who a charming wife acquires . . .
But the acquisition of even the most charming wife is not among the wishes of the 
dreamer. Two other lines would-be more appropriate:
He who succeeds in the lucky (big) throw The friend of a friend to be. .... 
The dream thus contains the lucky (big) throw which is not, however, a wish-fulfilment 
only, For it conceals also the painful reflection that in his. striving after friendship 
he has often had the misfortune to be thrown out, and the fear lest this fate may be 
repeated in the case of the young man by whose side he has enjoyed the performance of 
Fidelio. This is now followed by a confession, shameful to a man of his refinement,-!to 
.the effect that once, after such a rejection on the part of a friend, his profound 
sexual longing caused him. to masturbate twice in succession.
The other dream is as follows: Two university professors of his acquaintance are treating 
him in my place. One of them does, something to his penis; he is afraid of an operation. 
The other thrusts an iron bar against his mouth, so that he loses one or two teeth. He is 
bound with four silk handkerchiefs. 
The sexual if significance of this dream: can hardly be doubted. The silk handkerchiefs 
al lude to an identification with a homosexual of his acquaintance. The dreamer, who has 
never achieved coition (nor has he ever actually sought sexual intercourse) with men, 
conceives the sexual act on the lines of masturbation with which he was familiar during 
puberty.
I believe that the frequent modifications of the typical dream due-to[dental 
stimulus—that, for example in which another person draws the tooth from the dreamer’s 
mouth--will be made intelligible by the same explanation.¹ It may, however, be difficult 
to understand how dental stimulus can have come to have this significance. But here I may 
draw attention to the frequent displacement from, below to above which is at the service 
of sexual repression, and by means of which all kinds of sensations and intentions 
occurring in hysteria, which ought to be localized in the genitals, may at all events be 
realized in other, unobjectionable parts of the body. We have a case of such displacement 
when the genitals are replaced by the face in the symbolism of unconscious thought.  This 
is corroborated by the fact that verbal usage relates the buttocks.to the cheeks, and the 
labia minora to the lips which enclose the orifice of the mouth. The nose is compared to 
the; penis in numerous allusions, and in each; case the presence of hair completes the 
resemblance. Only one feature—the teeth-is beyond all possibility of being compared in 
this way; but it is just this coincidence of agreement and disagreement. which makes the 
teeth suitable for purposes of representation under the pressure of sexual repression.
I will not, assert that the interpretation of dreams due to Rental stimulus as dreams of 
masturbation (the correctness of which I cannot doubt) has been freed of all obscurity.² 
I carry the explanation as far as I am able, and must leave the rest unsolved. But I must 
refer to yet another relation indicated by a colloquial expression. In Austria there is 
in use ah indelicate designation for the act of masturbation, namely: "To pull One out," 
of "to pull one off.'"³ I am unable to say whence these colloquialisms originate, or on 
what symbolisms they are based; but the teeth would very well fit in With the first of 
the two. 
Dreams of pulling teeth, and of teeth falling out, are interpreted in popular belief to 
mean the death of a connection. Psycho-analysis can admit of such a meaning only at the 
most as a joking allusion to the sense already Indicated.
To the second group of typical dreams belong
¹The extraction of a tooth by another is usually to be interpreted as castration (cf. 
hair-cutting; Stekel). One must distinguish between dreams due to dental stimulus and 
dreams referring to the-dentist, such as have been recorded, for example, by Coriat 
(Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, iii, ,440).
²According to C. G. Jung, dreams due to dental stimulus in the case of women have the 
significance of parturition: dreams. E. Jones has given valuable, confirmation of this. 
The common element of this interpretation with that represented above may, be found in 
the fact that in both cases (castration-birth), there is a question of removing a part 
from the whole body.
³Cf. the biographical dream on pp.- 2S0-1.

those in which one is flying or hovering, falling, swimming, etc. What do these dreams 
signify? Here we cannot generalize: They mean, as we shall learn something different in 
each case; only, the  sensory material which they contain always comes from the same 
source.
We must conclude from the information obtained in psycho-analysis that these dreams also 
repeat impressions of our childhood—that is, that they refer to the games involving 
move men which have such an extraordinary attraction for children. Where is the uncle who 
has never made a child fly by running with it across the roomy with outstretched-arms, or 
has never played at falling with it by rocking it on his knee and then suddenly 
straightening his leg, or by lifting it above his head and suddenly pretending to 
withdraw his supporting hand? At such moments children shout with joy and insatiably 
demand a repetition .of the performance, especially if a little fright and dizziness are 
involved in it. In after years they repeat their sensations in dreams, but in dreams they 
omit the hands that held them, so that now they are free to float or fall. We know that 
all small children have a fondness for such games as rocking and see-sawing,; and when 
they see gymnastic performances at the circus their recollection of such games is 
refreshed. In some boys the hysterical attack consists: simply In the reproduction of 
such performances, which they accomplish with great dexterity. Not infrequently sexual 
sensations are excited by these games of movement innocent though they are in themselves. 
To express the matter in a few words: it is these romping games of childhood which are 
being repeated in dreams of flying, falling, vertigo, and the like, but the pleasurable 
sensations are now transformed into anxiety. But, as every mother knows, the romping, of: 
children often enough ends; in quarrelling and tears.
I have therefore good reason for rejecting the explanation that it is the condition of 
our cutaneous sensations during sleep, the sensation of the movements of the lungs, etc., 
that evoke dreams of flying and falling. As I see it, these sensations have themselves 
been reproduced from the memory to which the dream refers—-that they are therefore 
dream-content, and not dream-sources.⁴
This material, consisting of sensations of motion, similar in character, and originating 
from the same sources, is now used for the
⁴This passage, dealing with dreams- Of motion, is repeated on account of the context. 
Cf. p. 250
Dreams of flying or hovering, for the most part pleasurably toned, will call for the most 
widely differing interpretations—interpretations of a quite special nature in the case 
of some dreamers, and interpretations of a typical nature in that of others. One of my 
patients was in the habit of dreaming very frequently that she was hovering a little way 
above the street without touching the ground. She was very short of stature, and she 
shunned every sort of contamination involved by intercourse with human beings. Her dream 
of suspension —which raised her feet above the ground and allowed her head to tower 
into the air—fulfilled both of her wishes. In the case of other dreamers of the same 
sex, the dream of flying had the significance of the longing: "If only I were a little 
bird!" Similarly, others become angels at night, because no one has ever called them 
angels by day; The intimate connection between flying and the idea of a bird makes it 
comprehensible that the dream of flying, in the case of male dreamers, should usually 
have a coarsely sensual significance;¹ and we should not be surprised to hear that this 
or that dreamer is always very proud of his ability to fly.
Dr. Paul Federn (Vienna) has propounded the fascinating theory that a great many flying 
dreams are erection dreams, since the remark able phenomenon of erection, which 
constantly occupies the human phantasy, cannot fail to be impressive as an apparent 
suspension of the laws of gravity (cf. the winged phalli of the ancients).
It  is a noteworthy fact that a prudent experimenter like Mourly Void, who is really 
averse to any kind of interpretation, nevertheless defends the erotic interpretation of 
the dreams of flying and hovering.² He describes the erotic element as "the most 
important motive factor of the hovering dream," and refers to the strong sense of bodily 
vibration which accompanies this type of dream, and the frequent connection of such 
dreams with erections and emissions.
Dreams of falling are more frequently characterized by anxiety. Their interpretation, 
when they occur in women, offers no difficulty, be cause they nearly always accept the 
symbolic meaning of  failing, which is a circumlocution for giving way to an erotic 
temptation. We have
¹A reference to the German slang word vogeln (to copulate) from Vogel (a bird).—TR.
²"Uber den Troum," Ges. Schriften, Vol. III.

not yet exhausted the infantile sources of the dream of falling; nearly all children have 
fallen occasionally, and then been picked up and fondled; if they fell out of bed at 
night, they were picked up by the nurse and taken into heir bed.
People who dream often, and with great enjoyment, of swimming, cleaving the waves, etc., 
have usually been bed-wetters, and they now repeat in the dream a pleasure which they 
have long since learned to forego. We shall soon learn, from one example or another, to 
what representations dreams of swimming easily lend themselves.
The interpretation of dreams of fire justifies a prohibition of the nursery, which 
forbids children to play with fire so that they may not wet the bed at night. These 
dreams also are based on reminiscences of the enuresis nocturna of childhood. In my 
"Fragment of ah Analysis of Hysteria"³ I have given the complete analysis and synthesis 
of such a dream of fire in connection with the infantile -history of the dreamer, and 
have shown for the representation of what maturer impulses this in-fantile material has 
been utilized.
It would be possible to cite quite a number of other typical dreams, if by such one under 
stands dreams in which there is a frequent recurrence, in the dreams of different 
persons, of the same manifest dream-content. For example: dreams of passing through 
narrow alleys, or a whole suite of rooms; dreams of burglars, in respect of whom nervous 
people take measures of precaution before going to bed; dreams of being chased by wild 
animals (bulls, horses); or of being threatened with knives, daggers, and lances. The 
last two themes are characteristic of the manifest dream-content of persons suffering 
from anxiety, etc. A special investigation of this class of material would be well worth 
while. In lieu of this I shall offer two observations, which do not, however, apply 
exclusively to typical dreams.
The more one is occupied with the solution of dreams, the readier one becomes to 
acknowledge that the majority of the dreams of adults deal with sexual material and give 
expression to erotic wishes. Only those who really analyse dreams, that is, those who 
penetrate from their manifest content to the latent dream-thoughts, can form an opinion 
on this subject; but never those who are satisfied with registering merely the manifest 
content (as, for example, Nacke
³Collected Papers, III.

In his writings on sexual dreams). Let us recognize at once that there is nothing 
astonishing in this fact, which is entirely consistent with the principles of 
dream-interpretation. No other instinct has had to undergo so much suppression, from the 
time of childhood onwards, as the sexual instinct in all its numerous com ponents:¹ from 
no other instincts are so many and such intense unconscious wishes left over, which now, 
in the sleeping state, generate dreams. In dream-interpretation this importance of the 
sexual complexes must never be forgotten, though one must not, of course, exaggerate it 
to the exclusion of all other factors.
Of many dreams it may be ascertained, by careful interpretation, that they may even be 
understood bisexually, inasmuch as they yield an indisputable over-interpretation, in 
which they realize homosexual impulses—that is, impulses which are contrary to the 
normal sexual activity of the dreamer. But that all dreams are to be interpreted 
bisexually, as Stekel² maintains, and Adler,³ seems to me to be a generalization as~ 
insusceptible of proof as it is improbable, and one which, therefore, I should be loth to 
defend; for I should, above all, be at a loss to know how to dispose of the obvious fact 
that there are many dreams which satisfy other than erotic needs (taking the word in the 
widest sense), as, for example, dreams of hunger, thirst, comfort, etc. And other similar 
assertions, to the effect that "behind every dream one finds a reference to death" 
(Stekel), or that every dream shows "an advance from the feminine to the masculine line" 
(Adler), seem to me to go far beyond the admissible in the interpretation of dreams. The 
assertion that all dreams call for a sexual interpretation, against which there is such 
ah untiring polemic in the literature of the subject, is quite foreign to my 
Interpretation of Dreams. It will not be found in any of the eight editions of this book, 
and is in palpable contradiction to the rest of its contents.
We have stated elsewhere that dreams which are conspicuously innocent commonly embody 
crude erotic wishes, and this we might confirm by numerous further examples. But many 
dreams which appear indifferent, in which we should never suspect a tendency in any par-
¹Cf. Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex.
²W. Stekel, Die Sprache des Traumes (1911).
³Alf. Adler, "Der Psychische Hermaphroditismus im Leben und in der Neurose*' in 
Fortschritte der Medizin (1910), No. 16, and later papers in the Zentralblatt fur 
Psychoanalyse, i (1910-11).

ticular direction, may be traced, according to the analysis, to unmistakably sexual wish 
impulses, often of an unsuspected nature. For example, who, before it had been 
interpreted, would have suspected a sexual wish in the following dream? The dreamer 
relates: Between two stately palaces there stands, a little way back, a small house, 
whose doors are closed. My wife leads me along the little bit of road leading to the 
house and pushes the door open, and then I slip quickly and easily into the interior of a 
courtyard that slopes steeply upwards.
Anyone who has had experience in the translating of dreams will, of course, at once be re 
minded that penetration into narrow spaces and the opening of locked doors are among the 
commonest of sexual symbols, and will readily see in this dream a representation of 
attempted coition from behind (between the two stately buttocks of the female body). The 
narrow, steep passage is, of course, the vagina; the assistance attributed to the wife of 
the dreamer requires the interpretation that in reality it is only consideration for the 
wife which is responsible for abstention from such an attempt. Moreover, inquiry shows 
that on the previous day a young girl had entered the household of the dreamer; she had 
pleased him, and had given him the impression that she would not be altogether averse to 
an approach of this sort. The little house between the two palaces is taken from a 
reminiscence of the Hradschin In Prague, and once more points to the girl, who is a 
native of that city.
If, in conversation with my patients, I emphasize the frequency of the Oedipus dream— 
the dream of having sexual intercourse with one's mother—I elicit the answer: "I cannot 
remember such a dream." Immediately after wards, however, there arises the recollection 
of another, an unrecognizable, indifferent dream, which the patient has dreamed 
repeatedly, and which on analysis proves to be a dream with this very content—that is, 
yet another Oedipus dream. I can assure the reader that disguised dreams of sexual 
intercourse with the dreamer's mother are far more frequent than undisguised dreams to 
the same effect.⁴
⁴I have published a typical example of such a disguised Oedipus dream in No. 1 of the 
Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse (see below); another, with a detailed analysis, was 
published in No. 4 of the same journal by Otto Rank. For other disguised Oedipus dreams 
in which the eye appears as a symbol, see Rank (Int. Zeitschr. fur Ps. A., i, [1913]). 
Papers upon eye dreams and eye symbolism by Eder, Ferenczi, and Reitler will be found in 
the same issue. The blinding in the Oedipus legend and elsewhere is a substitute for 
castration. The ancients, by the way, were not unfamiliar with the symbolic 
interpretation of the undisguised Oedipus dream (see.0. Rank, Jahrb. ii, p. 534: "Thus, a 
dream of Julius Caesar's of sexual relations with his mother has been handed down to us, 
which the oneiroscopists interpreted as a favourable omen signifying his taking 
possession of the earth (Mother Earth). Equally well known is the oracle delivered to the 
Tarquinii, to the effect that that one of them would become the ruler, of Rome who should 
be the first to. kiss his mother (oscidurn matri tulerit), which Brutus con ceived as; 
referring to Mother Earth .(terram osculo contigit, scilicet quod ea communis mater 
omnium marrialium esset, Liyy I, lvi). Cf. here the dream of Hippias in Herodotus vi; 
107. These myths and interpretations point to a correct psychological insight. I haye 
found that those persons who consider themselves preferred or favoured by their mothers 
manifest in life that confidence in. themselves, and that unshakable optimism, which 
often seem heroic, and not- infrequently compel actual success. 
Typical example of a disguised Oedipus dream: A man dreams: He has a secret affair with a 
woman whom another man wishes to marry. He is concerned lest the other should discover 
this relation and abandon the marriage; he therefore behaves very affectionately to the 
man; he nestles up to him and kisses him. The facts of the dreamer's life touch the 
dream-content, only at one point. He has a secret affair with a married woman, and an 
equivocal expression of her husband, with whom he is on friendly terms, aroused in him 
the suspicion that he might have noticed something of this relationship. There is, 
however, in reality, yet another factor, the mention of which was avoided in the dream,: 
and which alone gives the key to it. The life of the husband.is, threatened by an organic 
malady, his wife is prepared for the possibility of his sudden death, and our dreamer 
consciously harbours the intention of marrying the young widow after her husband's 
decease. It is through this objective situation that the dreamer finds himself 
transferred into the constellation of the Oedipus dream; his wish is to be enabled to 
kill the man, so: that he may win the woman for his wife;, his dream gives expression to 
the wish in a hypocritical distortion. Instead of representing her as already married to 
the other man, it represents the other man only as wishing to marry her; which indeed 
corresponds with his own. secret intention, and the-hostile wishes directed against the 
man are concealed und0r demonstrations of affection, which are reminiscences of his 
childish relations to his father.

There are dreams of landscapes and localities in which emphasis is always laid upon the 
assurance: "I have been here before." But this Deja vu has a special significance in 
dreams. In this case the locality is always the genitals of the mother; of no other place 
can it be asserted with such certainty that one has been here before. I was once puzzled 
by the account of a dream given by a patient afflicted with obsessional neurosis. He 
dreamed that he called at a house where he had been twice before. But this very patient; 
had long ago told me of an episode of his sixth year. At that time he shared his mother's 
bed, and had abused the occasion by inserting his finger into his mother's genitals while 
she was asleep.
A large number of dreams, which are frequently full of anxiety, and often have for 
content the traversing. of narrow spaces, or staying long in the water, are-based upon 
phantasies: .concerning; the: intrauterine life," the sojourn in the mother's womb, and 
the act of birth. I here insert the dream of a young man who, in his phantasy, has even 
profited by the intra-uterine opportunity of spying upon an act of coition between his 
parents. 
He is in a deep shaft, in which there is a window, as in the Semmering tunnel. Through 
this he sees at first an empty landscape, and then he composes a picture in it, which is 
there all at once and fills up the empty space. The picture represents a field which is 
being deeply tilled by ah implement, and the wholesome air, the associated idea of hard 
work, and the bluish-black clods of earth make a pleasant impression on him; He then goes 
on and sees a work on education lying open . . . and is surprised that so much attention 
is devoted in it to the sexual feelings (of children), which makes him think of me. 
Here is a. pretty water-dream of a female patient, which was turned to special account in 
the course of treatment.
At her usual holiday resort on the . . . Lake, she flings herself into the dark water at 
a place where the pale moon is reflected in the water. Dreams of this sort are 
parturition dreams; their interpretation is effected by reversing the fact recorded in 
the manifest dream-content; thus, instead of flinging oneself into the water, read coming 
out of the water—that is, being born.¹ The place from which one is born may be 
recognized if one thinks of the humorous sense of the French la lune: The pale moon thus 
becomes the white bottom which the child soon guesses to be the place from which it came. 
Now what can be the meaning of the patient's wishing to be born at a holiday resort? I 
asked the dreamer this, and she replied without hesitation: "Hasn't the treatment made me 
as though I were born again?" Thus the dream becomes an invitation to continue the 
treatment at this summer resort—that is, to visit her there; perhaps it also contains a 
very bashful allusion to the wish to become a mother herself.²
¹For the mythological meaning of water-birth, see Rank: Der Mythus von der Geburt des 
Helden (1909);
²It was not for a long time that I learned to appreciate the significance of the 
phantasies and unconscious thoughts relating to life in the womb. They contain the 
explanation of the curious dread, felt by so many people, of being buried alive, as well, 
as the profoundest unconscious reason for the belief in a life after death, which 
represents only the projection into the future of this mysterious life before birth. The 
act of birth moreover, is the first experience attended by anxiety, and is thus, the 
source and model of the affect of anxiety.

Another dream of parturition, with its interpretation, I take from a paper by E. Jones. 
“She stood at the seashore watching a small boy, who seemed to be hers, wading into the 
water. This he did, till the water covered him ands he could only see his head bobbing up 
and down near the surface. The scene then changed to the crowded hall of an hotel. Her 
husband left her, and she 'entered into conversation with' a stranger.
"The second half of the dream was discovered in the analysis to represent flight from her 
husband, and the entering into intimate relations with a third person, behind whom was 
plainly indicated Mr. X's brother, mentioned in a former dream. The first part of the 
dream was a fairly evident birth-phantasy. In dreams, as in mythology, the delivery of a 
child from the uterine waters is commonly; represented, by way of distortion, as the 
entry of the child into water; among many other instances, the births of Adonis, Osiris, 
Moses, arid Bacchus are well-known illustrations of this. The bobbing up and down of the 
head in the water at once recalled to the patient the sensation of quickening which she 
had experienced in her only pregnancy. Thinking of the boy going, into the water, induced 
a reverie "in which she saw herself faking-him out of the water, carrying him into the 
nursery, washing-and-dressing him, and installing him in her household.
"The second half of the dreamy therefore, represents thoughts concerning; the elopement, 
which belonged to the first half of the under lying latent content; the first half of the 
dream corresponded with the second half of the: latent content, the birth phantasy. 
Besides this inversion in the order, further inversions took place in each half of the 
dream. In the first half the child entered the water, and then his head bobbed; in the 
underlying dream-thoughts the quickening: occurred first, arid then the child left the 
water (a: double inversion) ln the second half her- husband left her; in the 
dream-thoughts she left her husband."
Another parturition dream is related by Abraham—the dream of a young woman expecting 
her first confinement: From one point of the floor of the room a subterranean channel 
leads directly into the water? (path of parturition—amniotic fluid). She lifts up a 
trap in the floor, and there immediately appears a creature dressed in brownish fur; 
which almost resembles a seal. This creature; changes into the dreamer's younger brother, 
to whom her relation has always been maternal in character.
Rank has shown from [a number of dreams that parturition-dreams employ the same symbols 
as micturition-dreams The erotic stimulus expresses itself in these dreams, as an 
urethral stimulus. The, stratification: of meaning in these dreams corresponds with 
a-change, in the significance of the symbol since childhood.
We may here turn back to the interrupted theme (see p. 190) of the part played by 
organic, sleep-disturbing stimuli in dream-formation. Dreams which have come into 
existence under .these influences not only reveal quite frankly the wish fulfilling 
tendency, and the character of convenience-dreams, but they very often display a quite 
transparent symbolism as well, since waking not infrequently follows a stimulus whose 
satisfaction in symbolic disguise has already been Vainly attempted in the dream, This is 
true of emission dreams as well as those evoked by the need to urinate or defecate. The 
peculiar character of emission dreams permits us directly to unmask certain sexual 
symbols already recognized as typical, but nevertheless violently disputed, and it also 
convinces us that many an apparently innocent dream-situation is merely the symbolic; 
prelude to a crudely sexual scene. This, however, finds direct representation, as a rule, 
only in the comparatively infrequent emission dreams, "while ft often enough turns into 
an anxiety- dream, winch likewise leads to waking.
The symbolism' of dreams due to urethral stimulus is especially obvious, and has arrays 
been divined. ffippocrates1jhad already advanced the theory, that a disturbance of the 
bladder was indicated if one dreamt of fountains and springs (Havelock Ellis). Scherner, 
who has studied the manifold symbolism of the urethral stimulus, agrees that "the 
powerful urethral stimulus- always turns into the- stimulation of the" sexual; sphere and 
its symbolic imagery. . . The dream due to urethral stimulus is often at the same time 
the representative of the sexual dream."
O Rank, whose conclusions. (in his paper on Die Symbolschichtung im Wecktraum) I have 
here followed, argues very plausibly that a large number of "dreams due to urethral 
stimulus.” are really caused by sexual stimuli, which at first seek to gratify 
themselves by way of regression to the infantile form of urethral erotism. Those cases 
are 2especially, instructive in which the urethral stimulus thus produced leads to waking 
and the, emptying of the bladder, whereupon, in spite of this relief, the dream is 
continued, arid expresses its need in undisguisedly erotic images.¹
In a quite analogous manner dreams due to intestinal stimulus disclose the pertinent 
symbolism, and thus confirm the relation, Which is also amply verified by 
ethno-psychology, of gold and feces.² "Thus, for example, a woman, at a time when she is 
under the care of a physician on account of an intestinal disorder, dreams of a digger 
for hidden treasure who is burying a treasure in the vicinity of a little wooden shed 
which looks like a rural privy. A second part of the dream has as its content how she 
wipes the posterior of her child, a little girl, who has soiled herself."
Dreams of rescue are connected with parturition dreams. To rescue, especially to rescue 
from the water, is, when dreamed by a woman, equivalent to giving birth; this sense is, 
however, modified when the dreamer is a man.³
Robbers, burglars, and ghosts, of which we are afraid before going to bed, and which 
sometimes even disturb our sleep, originate in one and the same childish reminiscence. 
They are the nightly visitors who have waked the. Child in order to set it on the 
chamber, so that it may not wet the bed, or have lifted the cover let in order to see 
clearly how the child is holding its hands while sleeping. I have been able to induce an 
exact recollection of the nocturnal visitor in the analysis of some of these anxiety 
dreams. The robbers were always the father; the ghosts more probably correspond to female 
persons in white night-gowns.
F. Examples—Arithmetic and Speech in Dreams
Before I proceed to assign to its proper place the fourth of the factors which control the
¹"The same symbolic representations which in the infantile sense constitute the basis of 
the vesical dream appear in the recent sense in purely sexual significance: 
water==urine=semen=amniotic fluid; ship=to pump ship (urinate) =seed-capsule; getting 
wet=enuresis=coitus=pregnancy; swimmings full bladder=dwelling place of the unborn; 
rain=urination=symbol of fertilization; traveling (journeying—alighting)=getting out of 
bed=having sexual intercourse (honeymoon journey); urinating=sexual ejaculation" (Rank,- 
i, c).
²Freud, "Character and Anal Erotism," Collected Papers, ii; Rank, Die Symbolschictung, 
etc.; Dattner, Intern. Zeitschr. f. Psych, i (1913); Reik, Intern. Zeitschr., iii (1915).
³For such a dream see Poster, "Ein Fall von psychoanalytischer Seelensorge und 
Seelenheilung," in Evangelische Freiheit (1909). Concerning the symbol of "rescuing," see 
my paper, "The Future Prospects of Psycho-Analytic Therapy" (p. 123 above). Also 
"Contribution to the Theory of Love, 1: A Special Type of Object Choice in Men," in 
Collected Papers, iv. Also Rank, "Beilege zur Rettungs-phantasie," in the Zentralblatt 
fiir Psychoanalyse, i (1910), p. 331; Reik; "Zur Rettungssymbolic" ibid., p. 299.

formation of dreams, I shall cite a few examples from my collection of dreams, partly for 
the purpose of illustrating the co-operation of the three factors with which we are 
already acquainted, and partly for the purpose of adducing evidence for certain 
unsupported assertions which have been made, or of bringing out what necessarily follows 
from them. It has, of course, been difficult in the foregoing account of the dream-work 
to demonstrate my conclusions by means of examples. Examples in support of isolated 
statements are convincing only when considered in the context of an interpretation of a 
dream as a whole; when they are wrested from their context, they lose their value; on the 
other hand, a dream-interpretation, even when it is by no means profound, soon becomes so 
extensive that it obscures the thread of the discussion which it is intended to 
illustrate. This technical consideration must be my excuse if I now proceed to mix 
together all sorts of things which have nothing in common except their reference to the 
text of the foregoing chapter.
We shall first consider a few examples of very peculiar or unusual methods of 
representation in dreams. A lady dreamed as follows: A servant-girl is standing on a 
ladder as though to clean the windows, and has with her a chimpanzee and a gorilla cat 
(later corrected, angora cat). She throws the animals on to the dreamer; the chimpanzee 
nestles up to her, and this is very disgusting. This dream has accomplished its purpose 
by a very simple means, namely, by taking a mere figure of speech literally, and 
representing it in accordance with the literal meaning of its words. Monkey, like the 
names of animals in general, is an opprobrious epithet, and the situation of the dream 
means merely to hurl invectives. This same collection will soon furnish us with further 
examples of the employment of this simple artifice in the dream-work. 
Another dream proceeds in a very similar manner: A woman with a child which has a 
conspicuously deformed cranium; the dreamer has heard that the child acquired this 
deformity owing to its position in its mother's womb.
The doctor says that the cranium might be given a better shape by means of compression, 
but that this would injure the brain. She thinks that because it is a boy it won't suffer 
so much from deformity. This dream contains a plastic representation of the abstract 
concept: Childish impressions, with which the dreamer has become familiar in the course 
of the treatment In the following example the dream-work follows rather a different 
course. The dream contains a recollection of an excursion to the Hilmteich, near Graz: 
There is a terrible storm outside; a miserable hotel—the water is drip ping from the 
walls, and the beds are damp. (The latter part of the content was less directly expressed 
than I give it.) The dream signifies superfluous. The abstract idea occurring in the 
dream-thoughts is first mad equivocal by a certain abuse of language; it has perhaps been 
replaced by overflowing, or by fluid and superfluid (-fluous), and has then been brought 
to representation by an accumulation of like impressions. Water within, water without, 
water in the beds in the form of dampness—every thing fluid and super fluid. That for 
the purposes of dream-representation the spelling is much less considered than the sound 
of words ought not to surprise us when we remember that rhyme exercises a similar 
privilege.
The fact that language has at its disposal a great number of words which were originally 
used in a pictorial and concrete sense, but are at present used in a colourless and 
abstract fashion, has, in certain other cases, made it very easy for the dream to 
represent its thoughts. The dream has only to restore to these words their full 
significance, or to follow their change of meaning a little way back. For example, a man 
dreams that his friend; who is struggling to get out of a very tight place, calls upon 
him for help. The analysis shows that the tight place is a hole, and that the dreamer 
symbolically uses these very words to his friend: "Be careful, or you'll get yourself 
into a hole."¹ Another dreamer climbs a mountain from which he obtains an 
extraordinarily extensive view. He identifies himself with his brother, who is editing a 
review dealing with the Far East. 
In a dream in Der Grime Heinrich, a spirited horse is plunging about in a field of the 
finest oats, every grain of which is really "a sweet almond, a raisin and a new penny" 
wrapped in red silk and tied with a bit of pig's bristle." The poet (or the dreamer) 
immediately furnishes the meaning of this dream, for the horse felt himself pleasantly 
tickled, so that he ex claimed: "The oats are pricking me" .("I feel my oats").
In the old Norse sagas (according to Henzen) prolific use is made in dreams of 
colloquialisms and witty expressions; one scarcely finds a dream without a double meaning 
or a play upon words.
¹English example.—TR.
It would be a special undertaking to collect such methods of representation and to 
arrange them in accordance with the principles upon which they are based. Some of the 
representations are almost witty. They give one the impression that one would have never 
guessed their meaning if the dreamer himself had not succeeded in explaining it.
1. A man dreams that he is asked for a Name, which, however,- he cannot recall. He 
himself explains that this means: "I shouldn't dream of it."
2. A female patient relates a dream in which all the persons concerned were singularly 
large. "That means," she adds, "that it must deal with an episode of my early childhood, 
for at that time all grown-up people naturally seemed to me immensely large." She herself 
did not appear in the dream.
The transposition into childhood is expressed differently in other dreams—by the 
translation of time into space. One sees persons and scenes as though at a great 
distance, at the end of a long road, or as though one were looking at them through the 
wrong end of a pair of opera-glasses.
3. A man who in waking life shows an inclination to employ abstract and indefinite 
expressions, but who otherwise has his wits about him, dreams, in a certain connection, 
that he reaches a railway station just as a train is coming in. But then the platform 
moves to wards the train, which stands still; an absurd inversion of the real state of 
affairs. This detail, again, is nothing more than an indication to the effect that 
something else in the dream must be inverted. The analysis of the- same dream leads to 
recollections of picture-books in which men were represented standing on their heads and 
walking on their hands.
4. The same dreamer, on another occasion, relates a short dream which almost recalls the 
technique of a rebus. His uncle gives him a kiss in an automobile. He immediately adds 
the interpretation, which would never have occurred to me: it means, auto-erotism. In the 
waking state this might have been said in jest.
5. At a New Year's Eve dinner the host, the patriarch of the family, ushered in the New 
Year with a speech. One of his sons-in-law, a lawyer, was not inclined to take the old 
man seriously, especially when in the course of his speech he expressed himself as 
follows: "When I open the ledger for the Old Year and glance at its pages I see 
everything on the asset side and nothing, thank the Lord, on the side of liability; all 
you children have been a great asset, none of you a liability." On hearing this the young 
lawyer thought of X, his wife's brother, who was a cheat and a liar, and whom he had 
recently extricated from the entanglements of the law. That night, in a dream, he saw the 
New Year's celebration once more, and heard the speech, or rather saw it. Instead of 
speaking, the old man actually opened the ledger, and on the side marked assets he saw 
his name amongst others, but on the other side, marked liability, there was the name of 
his brother-in-law, X. However, the word liability was changed into Lie-Ability, which he 
regarded as X's main characteristic.¹
6. A dreamer treats another person for a broken bone. The analysis shows that the 
fracture represents a broken marriage vow, etc.
7. In the dream-content the time of day often represents a certain period of the 
dreamer's childhood. Thus, for example, 5:15 a.m. means to one dreamer the age of five 
years and three months; when he was that age, a younger brother was born.
8. Another representation of age in a dream: A woman is walking with two little girls; 
there is a difference of fifteen months in their ages. The dreamer cannot think of any 
family of her acquaintance in which this is the case. She herself interprets it to mean 
that the two children represent her own person, and that the dream reminds her that the 
two traumatic events of her childhood were separated by this period of time (3½ and 4¾ 
years).
9. It is not astonishing that persons who are undergoing psycho-analytic treatment 
frequently dream of it, and are compelled to give expression in their dreams to all the 
thoughts and expectations aroused by it. The image chosen for the treatment is as a rule 
that of a journey, usually in a motor-car, this being a modern and complicated vehicle; 
in the reference to the speed of the car the patient's ironical humour is given free 
play. If the unconscious, as an element of waking thought, is to be represented in the 
dream, it is replaced, appropriately enough, by subterranean localities, which at other 
times, when there is no reference to: analytic treatment, have, represented the female 
body or the womb. Below in the dream very often refers to the genitals, and its opposite, 
above, to the face, mouth or breast. By wild beasts the dream-work usually symbolizes 
passionate impulses; those of the dream-
¹Reported by Brill in his Fundamental Conceptions of Psychoanalysis.
er, and also those of other persons of whom the dreamer is afraid; or thus, by means of a 
very slight displacement, the persons who experience these passions. From this it is not 
very; far to the totemistic representation of the dreaded father by means of vicious 
animals, dogs, wild horses, etc. One might say that wild beasts serve to represent the 
libido, feared by the ego, and combated by repression. Even the neurosis itself, the sick 
person, is often separated from the dreamer and exhibited in the dream as an independent 
person. 
One may go so far as to say that the dream work makes use of all the means accessible to 
it for the visual representation of the dream thoughts, whether these appear admissible 
or inadmissible to waking criticism, and thus exposes itself to the doubt as well as the 
derision of all those who have only hearsay knowledge of dream-interpretation, but have 
never themselves practiced it. Stekel's book, Die Sprache des Traumes, is especially rich 
in such examples, but I avoid citing illustrations from this work as the author's lack of 
critical judgment and his arbitrary technique would make even the unprejudiced observer 
feel doubtful.
10. From an essay by V. Tausk (“(Kleider und Farbenim Dienste der Traumdarsteilung," in 
Interna. Zeitschr. fur Ps.A., ii [1914]): 
(a) A dreams that he sees his former governess wearing a dress of black lustre, which 
fits closely over her buttocks. That means he declares this woman to be lustful.
(b) C in a dream sees a girl on the road to X, bathed in a white light and wearing a 
white blouse.
The dreamer began an affair with a Miss White on this road.
11. In an analysis which I carried out in the French language I had to interpret a dream 
in which I appeared as an elephant. I naturally had to ask why I was thus represented: 
"Vous me trompez," answered the dreamer (Trompe = trunk). 
The dream-work often succeeds in representing very refractory material, such as proper 
names, by means of the forced exploitation of very remote relations. In one of my dreams 
old Brucke has set me a task. I make a preparation, and pick something out of it which 
looks like crumpled tinfoil. (I shall return to this dream later.) The corresponding 
association, which is not easy to find, is stanniol, and now I know that I have in mind 
the name of the author Stannius, which appeared on the titlepage of a treatise on the 
nervous system of fishes, which in my youth I regarded with reverence. The first 
scientific problem which my teacher set me did actually relate to the nervous system of a 
fish— the Ammcoetes.  Obviously this name could not be, utilized in the picture-puzzle.
Here I must not fail to include a dream with a curious content, which is worth noting 
also as the dream of  a child and which is readily explained he analysis. A lady tells 
me: "I can remember that when I was a child I repeatedly dreamed that God wore a conical 
paper hat on His head. They often used to make me wear such a hat at table, so that I 
shouldn't be able to look at the plates of the other children and see how. much they had 
received: of any particular dish.  Since I had heard that God was omniscient, the dream 
signified that I knew everything in spite of the hat which I was made to wear.
What the dream-work consists in, and its unceremonious handling of. its material, the 
dream-thoughts may be shown in an instructive manner by the numbers and calculations 
which occur in dreams. Superstition, by the way, regards numbers as having a special 
significance in dreams. I shall therefore give a few examples of this-kind from my 
collection.
I. From the dream of a lady, shortly before the end of her treatment: 
She wants to pay for something or other; her daughter stakes 3 florins 65 kreuzer from 
her purse; but the mother says: "What are you doing? It cost only 21 kreuzer?” This 
fragment of the dream was intelligible without further explanation owing to my knowledge 
of the dreamer's circumstances; The lady was a foreigner, who had placed hit daughter at 
school in Vienna, and was able to continue my treatment as long as her daughter remained 
in the city. In  three weeks the daughter's scholastic year would end, and the treatment 
would then stop. On the day before the dream the principal of the school had asked her 
whether she could not decide to leave the child at school for another year. She had then 
obviously reflected, that in this case she would be able to continue the treatment for 
another year. Now, this is what the dream refers to, for a year' is equal to 365 days; 
the three weeks remaining before the end of the scholastic year, and of the treatment, 
are equivalent to. 21 days (thought not to so many hours of treatment). The numerals, 
which in the dream-thoughts refer to periods of time are given money values in the dream, 
and simultaneously a deeper meaning finds expression for time is money. 365 kreuzer, of 
course, are 3 florin 65 kreuzer. The smallness of the sums which appear in the dream is a 
self-evident wish-fulfilment; the wish has reduced both the cost of the treatment and the 
year’s school fees.
2. in another dream the numerals are involved in even more complex relations. A young 
lady, who has been married for some tears, learns that an acquaintance of hers, of about 
the same age, Elise L, has just become engaged. Thereupon she dreams: She is sitting in 
the theatre with her husband, and one side of the stalls is quite empty. Her husband 
tells her that Elise L and her fiancé had also whished to come to the theatre, but that 
they only could have obtained poor seats; three for I florin 50 kreuzer, and of course 
they could not take those. She thinks they didn’t lose much, either.
What is the origin of the I florin 50 kreuzer? A really indifferent incident of the 
previous day. The dreamer’s sister-in-law had received 150 florins as a present from 
her husband, and hastened to get rid of them by buying some jewellery. Let us note that 
150 florin is 100 time I florin 50 kreuzer. But whence the 3 in connection with the seats 
in the theatre? There is only one association for this, namely, that the fiancé is three 
months younger than herself. When we have ascertained the significance, of the fact that 
one side of the stalls is empty we have the solution of the dream. This feature is an 
undisguised allusion to a little incident which had given her husband a good excuse; for 
teaming her. She had decided to go to the theatre, that week; she had. been careful to 
obtain tickets  a few days beforehand, and had had to pay the advance booking fee. When 
they got to the theatre they found that one side of the house was. almost empty; so that 
is he certainly need not have been in such a hurry.
I shall now; substitute the dream-thoughts for the dream: "It surely was nonsense to 
marry so early; there was no need for my being in such a hurry. From Elise L's Example I 
see that I should have got a husband just the same- and one a hundred times better—If I 
had only waited (antithesis.to the haste of her sister in law), I could have bought three 
such men for the money (the dowry) -Our attention is drawn to the fact that the numerals 
in this dream have changed their meanings and them relations, to a much greater extent 
than in the one. previously considered. The transforming and distorting activity of. the 
dream has in this case been greater- a fact which we interpret as meaning that these 
dream-thoughts had to overcome an unusual degree of endo-psychic resistance before they 
attained to representation. And we must not overlook the fact that the dream contains an 
absurd element, namely, that two persons are expected to take three seats. It will throw 
some light on the question of the interpretation of absurdity in dreams if I remark that 
this absurd detail of the dream content is intended to represent the most strongly 
emphasized of the dream-thoughts: "It was nonsense to marry so early." The figure 3, 
which occurs in a quite subordinate relation between the two persons compared (three 
months' difference in their ages), has thus been adroitly utilized.tp. produce the idea 
of nonsense re quired by the dream. The reduction of the actual 150 florins to 1 florin 
50 kreuzer corresponds to the dreamer's disparagement of her husband in her suppressed 
thoughts.
3. Another example displays the arithmetical powers of dreams, which have brought them 
into such disrepute. A man dreams: He is sitting in the B's house (the B's are a family 
with Which he was formerly acquainted), and he says: "It was nonsense that you didn't 
give me Amy for my wife" Thereupon, he asks the girl: "How old are you?" Answer: "I was 
born in 1882" "Ah, then you are 28 years old.”
Since the dream was dreamed in the year 1898, this is obviously bad arithmetic, and the 
inability of the dreamer to calculate may, if it cannot be otherwise explained, be 
likened to that of a general paralytic. My patient was one of those men who cannot help 
thinking about every woman they; see. The-patient who <for some months came next after 
him in my consulting-room was a young lady; he met this lady after he had constantly 
asked about her, and he was very anxious to make a good impression on her. This was the 
lady whose age he estimated at 28. So much for explaining the result of his apparent 
calculation. But 1882 was the year in which he had married. He had been unable to refrain 
from entering into conversation with the two other women whom he met at my house—the 
two by no means youthful maids who alternately opened the door to him—and as he did not 
find them very responsive, he had told himself that they probably regarded him as elderly 
and serious.
Bearing in mind these examples, and others of a similar nature (to follow), we may say: 
The dream-work does not calculate at all, whether correctly or incorrectly; it only 
strings together, in the form of a sum, numerals which occur in the dream-thoughts, and 
which may serve as allusions to material which is insusceptible of representation. It 
thus deals with figures, as material for expressing its intentions, just as it deals with 
all other concepts, and with names and speeches which are only verbal images.
For the dream-work cannot compose a new speech. No matter how many speeches and answers, 
which may in themselves be sensible or absurd, may occur in dreams, analysis shows us 
that the dream has merely taken from the dream-thoughts fragments of speeches which have 
really been delivered or heard, and has dealt with them in the most arbitrary fashion. It 
has not only torn them from their context and mutilated them, accepting one fragment and 
rejecting another, but it has often fitted them together in a novel manner, so that the 
speech which seems coherent in a dream is dissolved by analysis into three or four 
components. In this new application of the words the dream has often ignored the meaning 
which they had in the dream-thoughts, and has drawn an entirely new meaning from them.¹ 
Upon closer inspection, the more distinct and com pact ingredients of the dream-speech 
may be distinguished from others, which serve as connectives, and have probably been 
supplied, just as we supply omitted letters and syllables in reading. The dream-speech 
thus has the structure of breccia, in which the larger pieces of various material are 
held together by a solidified cohesive medium. 
Strictly speaking, of course, this description is correct only for those dream-speeches 
which have something of the sensory character of a speech, and are described as speeches. 
The others, which have not, as it were, been perceived as heard or spoken (which have no 
ac companying acoustic or motor emphasis in the
¹Analyses of other numerical dreams have been given by Jung, Marcinowski and others. 
Such dreams often involve very complicated arithmetical operations, which are none the 
less solved by the dreamer with astonishing confidence. Cf. also Ernest Jones, "Uber 
unbewusste Zuhlenbehundlung,"' Zebtralb. fur Psychoanalyse, 4, ii, [1912], p. 241). 
Neurosis behaves in the same fashion. I know a patient who—involuntarily and 
unwillingly—hears (hallucinates) songs or fragments of songs without being able to 
understand their significance for her psychic life. She is certainly not a paranoiac. 
Analysis shows that by exercising a certain license she gave the text of these songs a 
false application. "Oh, thou blissful one! Oh, thou happy one!" This is the first line of 
Christmas carol, but by not continuing it to the Word, Christmastide, she turns it into a 
bridal song, etc. The same mechanism of distortion may operate, without hallucination, 
merely in association.

dream) are simply thoughts, such as occur in our waking life, and find their way 
unchanged into many of our dreams. Our reading, too, seems to provide an abundant and not 
easily traceable source for the indifferent speech-material of dreams. But anything that 
is at all conspicuous as a speech in a dream can be referred to actual speeches which 
have been made or heard by the dreamer.
We have already found examples of the derivation of such dream-speeches in the analyses 
of dreams which have been cited for other purposes. Thus, in the innocent market-dream 
(p. 213) where the speech: That is no longer to be had .serves to identify me with the 
butcher, while a, fragment of the, other, speech. I don't know that, I don't take that, 
precisely fulfils the task of rendering the dream innocent. On the previous day, the 
dreamer, replying to some unreasonable demand on the part of her cook, had waved her 
aside with the words: I don't know that, behave yourself properly, and she afterwards 
took into the dream the first, indifferent-sounding part of the speech in order to allude 
to the latter part, which fitted well in to the phantasy underlying the dream, but which 
might also have betrayed it.
Here is one of many examples which all lead to the same conclusion:
A large courtyard in which dead bodies are being burned. The dreamer says, "I'm going, I 
can't stand the sight of it." (Not a distinct speech.) Then he meets two butcher boys and 
asks, "Well, did it taste good?" And one of them answers, "No, it wasn't good" As though 
it had been human flesh.
The innocent occasion of this dream is as follows: After taking supper with his wife, the 
dreamer pays a visit to his worthy but by no means appetizing neighbour. The hospitable 
old lady is just sitting down to her own supper, and presses him (among men a composite, 
sexually significant word is used jocosely in the place of this word) to taste it. He 
declines, saying that he has no appetite. She replies: "Go on with you, you can manage it 
all right," or something of the kind. The dreamer is thus forced to taste and praise what 
is offered him. "But that's good!" When he is alone again with his wife, he complains of 
his neighbour's importunity, and of the quality of the food which he has tasted. "I can't 
stand the sight of it," a phrase that in the dream, too, does not emerge as an actual 
speech, is a thought relating to the physical charms of the lady who invites him, which 
may be translated by the statement that he has no desire to look at her.
The analysis of another dream-which I will cite at this stage for the sake of a very 
distinct speech, which constitutes its nucleus, but which will be explained only when we 
come to evaluate the affects in dreams^-is more instructive. I dream very vividly: I have 
gone to Brucke's laboratory at night, and on hearing a gentle knocking at the door, I 
open it to (the deceased) Professor Fleischl, who enters in the company of several 
strangers, and after saying a few words sits down at his table. Then follows a second 
dream: My friend Fl has come to Vienna, unobtrusively, in July; I meet him in the street, 
in conversation with my (deceased) friend P, and I go, with them somewhere, and they sit 
down facing each other as though at a small table, while I sit facing them at the narrow 
end of the table. Fl speaks of his sister, and says: "In three-quarters of an hour she 
was dead," and then something like "That is the threshold." As P does not understand him, 
Fl turns to me, and asks me how much I have fold P of his affairs. At this, overcome by 
strange emotions, I try to tell Fl that P (cannot possibly know anything, of course, 
because he) is not alive. But noticing the mistake myself, I say: "Non vixit." Then I 
look searchingly at P, and under my gaze he becomes pale and blurred, and his eyes turn a 
sickly blue—and atlas he dissolves. I rejoice greatly at this; I now understand that 
Ernst Fleischl, too, is only an apparition, a revenant, and I find that it is quite 
possible that such a person should exist only so long as one wishes him to, and that he 
can be made to disappear by the wish of another person.
This very pretty dream unites so many of the enigmatical characteristics of the dream 
content— the criticism made in the dream itself, inasmuch as I myself notice my mistake 
in saying Non vixit instead of Non vivit, the un constrained intercourse with deceased 
persons, whom the dream itself declares to be dead, the absurdity of my: conclusion, and 
the intense satisfaction which it gives me—that "I would give my life" to expound the 
complete solution of the problem. But in reality I am incapable of doing what I do in the 
dream, i.e., of sacrificing such intimate friends to my ambition. And if I attempted to 
disguise the facts, the true meaning of the dream, with which I am perfectly familiar, 
would be spoiled. I must there fore be content to select a few of the elements of the 
dream for interpretation, some here, and some at a later stage.
The  scene in which I annihilate P wit a glance forms the centre of the dream. His eyes 
become strange and weirdly blue, and then he dissolves. This scene Is an unmistakable. 
imitation of a scene that was actually experienced. I was a demonstrator at the 
Physiological Institute; I was on duty in the morning, and Brucke learned that on several 
occasions I had been unpunctual P in my attendance at the students' laboratory. One 
morning, therefore, he arrived at the hour of opening, and waited for me. What he said to 
me was brief and to the point ; but it was not what he said that mattered. What 
overwhelmed the was the terrible gaze of his blue eyes, before which I melted away- as P 
does in the dream, for P has exchanged roles with me, much to my relief. Anyone who 
remembers the eyes of the great master, which were wonderfully beautiful even in his old 
age, and has ever seen him: angered, will readily imagine the emotions of the young 
transgressor on that occasion.
But for a long while I was unable to account for the Non vixit with which; I pass 
sentence in the dream. Finally, I remembered that the reason Why these two words were so 
distinct in the dream was not because they were heard or spoken^ but because": they were 
seen. Then I knew at once where they came from. On the pedestal of the statue of the 
Emperor Joseph in the Vienna Hofburg: are inscribed the following beautiful words: 
Saluti patriae vixit
non diu sed totus.¹ 
From this inscription I had taken what fitted one inimical train of thought in my dream 
thoughts, and which was" intended to mean:
"That fellow has nothing to say in the matter, he is not really alive.” And I now 
recalled that the dream was dreamed a few days after the unveiling of the memorial tb 
Fleischl, in the cloisters of the University, upon which occasion I had once more seen 
the memorial to Brucke, and must have thought with regret (in the unconscious) how my 
gifted friend P, with all his devotion to science, had by his premature death forfeited 
his just claim to a memorial in these halls. So I set up this Memorial to
¹The inscription in fact reads:
Saluti publicae vixit
Non diu sed totus. 
[He lived for the safety of the public, not for a long time, but always]
The- motive of-the mistake; patriae [fatherland] for, publicae, has probably been 
correctly divined by Wittels.

Him in the dream; Josef is my friend P's baptismal name.²
According to the rules of dream-interpretation I should still hot be justified in 
replacing non vixit, which I need, by non vixit, which is placed at my disposal by the 
recollection of the Kaiser Josef memorial; Some other element of the dream-thoughts must 
have contributed to make this possible. Something now calls my attention to the fact that 
in the dream scene two trains of thought relating to My friend P meet, one hostile, the 
other affectionate the formed on 'the surface," the latter covered up land both are given 
representation in the same words; non vixit. As my friend P has deserved well of science, 
I erect a memorial to him; as he has been guilty of a malicious wish (expressed at the 
end of the dream) I annihilate him. I Have here constructed a sentence with a special 
cadence, and in doing so I must have been influenced by some existing model.  But where 
can I find a similar antithesis, a similar parallel between two opposite reaction to the 
same person both of which can claim to be wholly justified, and which nevertheless do not 
attempt to affect one another? Only in one passage which, however, makes a profound 
impression upon the reader—-Brutus's speech of justification in Shakespeare's Julius 
Caesar: “As Caesar loved me, I weep for him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as 
he was valiant; I honour him; but as he was ambitious, I slew him." Have we not here the 
same verbal structure, and the same antithesis of thought, as in the dream-thoughts? So I 
am playing Brutus in my dream. If only I could find in my dream thoughts another 
collateral connection to confirm this! I think it might be the following. My friend: Fl 
comes to Vienna in July, This detail is hot the case in reality. To my knowledge, my 
friend has never been in Vienna in July. But the month of July is named after Julius 
Caesar, and might' therefore very well furnish the required allusion to the intermediate 
thought—that I am playing the part of-Brutus.³
Strangely enough, I once "did actually play the part of Brutus. When I was a boy of 
fourteen, I presented the scene between Brutus and Caesar in Schiller's poem to an 
audience of children: with the assistance of my nephew, who was a year older than I, and 
who had come to us from England-and was thus a revenant-
²As an example of over-determination: My excuse for coming late was that after working 
late into the night, in the morning I had to make the long journey from 
Kaiser-Josef-Strasse to Wahringer Strasse.
³And also, Caesar=Kaiser.
 
for In him I recognized the playmate of my early childhood. Until the end of my third 
year we had been inseparable; we had loved each other and fought each other and, as I 
have already hinted, this childish relation has determined all my later feelings in my 
intercourse with persons of my own age. My nephew John has since then had many 
incarnations, which have revivified first one and then another aspect of a character that 
is ineradicably fixed in my unconscious memory. At times he must have treated me very 
badly, and I must have op posed my tyrant courageously, for in later years I was often 
told of a short speech in which I defended myself when my father—his 
grandfather—called me to account: "Why did you hit John?" "I hit him because he hit 
me." It must be this childish scene which causes non vivit to become non vixit, for in 
the language of later childhood striking is known as wichsen (German: wichsen—to 
polish, to wax; i.e., to thrash); and the dream-work does not disdain to take advantage 
of such associations. My hostility towards my friend P, which has so little foundation in 
reality—he was greatly my superior, and might therefore have been a new edition of my 
old playmate—may certainly be traced to my complicated relations with John during our 
childhood. I shall, as I have said, return to this dream later on.
G. Absurd Dreams—Intellectual Performances in Dreams
I
Hitherto, in our interpretation of dreams, we have come upon the element of absurdity in 
the dream-content so frequently that we must no longer postpone the investigation of its 
cause and its meaning. We remember, of course, that the absurdity of dreams has furnished 
the opponents of dream-interpretation with their chief argument for regarding the dream 
as merely the meaningless product of an attenuated and fragmentary activity of the psyche.
I will begin with a few examples in which the absurdity of the dream-content is apparent 
only, disappearing when the dream is more thoroughly examined. These are certain dreams 
which—accidently, one begins by thinking— are concerned with the dreamer's dead 
father.
1. Here is the dream of a patient who had lost his father six years before the date of 
the dream:
His father had been involved in a terrible accident. He was travelling by the night 
express when the train was derailed, the seats were telescoped, and his head was crushed 
from side to side. The dreamer sees him lying on his bed; from his left eyebrow a wound 
runs vertically upwards. The dreamer is surprised that his father should have met with an 
accident (since he is dead already, as the dreamer adds.in relating his dream). His 
father's eyes are so clear:
According' to the prevailing standards of dream-criticism, this dream-content would be 
explained as follows: At first, while the dreamer is picturing his father's accident, he 
has for gotten that his father has already been-many years in his grave; in the course of 
the dream this memory awakens, so that he is surprised at his own dream even while he is 
dreaming it. Analysis, however, tells us that it is quite superfluous to seek for such 
explanations. The dreamer had commissioned a sculptor to make a bust of his father, and 
he had inspected the bust two days before the dream. It is this which seems to him to 
have come to grief (the German word means gone wrong or met with an accident). The 
sculptor has never seen his father, and has had to work from photographs. On the very day 
before the dream the son had sent an old family servant to the studio in order to see 
whether he, too, would pass the same judgment upon the marble bust—namely, that it was 
too narrow between the temples. And how follows the memory-material which has contributed 
to the formation of the dream: The dreamer's father had a habit, whenever he was harassed 
by business cares or domestic difficulties, of pressing his temples between his hands, as 
though his head was growing too large and he was trying to compress it. When the dreamer 
was four years old, he was present when a pistol was accidentally discharged, and his 
father's eyes were blackened (his eyes are so clear). When his father was thoughtful or 
depressed, he had a deep furrow in his forehead just where the dream shows his wound. The 
fact that in the dream this wrinkle is replaced by a wound points to the second occasion 
for the dream. The dreamer had taken a photograph of his little daughter; the plate had 
fallen from his hand, and when he picked it up it revealed a crack which ran like a 
vertical furrow across the child's forehead, extending as far as the eyebrow. He could 
not help feeling a superstitious foreboding, for on the day before his mother's death the 
negative of her portrait had been cracked.
Thus, the absurdity of this dream is simply the result of a carelessness of verbal 
expression, which does not distinguish between the bust or the photograph and the 
original. We are all accustomed to making remarks like: "Don't you think it's exactly 
your father?" The appearance of absurdity in this dream might, of course, have been 
easily avoided. If it were permissible to form an opinion on the strength of a single 
case, one might be tempted to say that this semblance of absurdity is admitted or even 
desired.
II
Here is another example of the same kind from my own dreams (I lost my father in the year 
1896):
After his death, my father has played a part in the political life of the Magyars, and 
has united them into a political whole; and here I see, indistinctly, a little picture: a 
number of men, as though in the Reichstag; a man is standing on one or two chairs; there 
are others round about him. I remember that on his death bed he looked so like Garibaldi, 
and I am glad that this promise has really come true. 
Certainly this is absurd enough. It was dreamed at the time when the Hungarians were in a 
state of anarchy, owing to Parliamentary obstruction, and were passing through the crisis 
from, which Koloman Szell subsequently de livered them. The trivial circumstance that the 
scenes beheld in dreams consist of such little pictures is not without significance for 
the elucidation of this element. The customary visual dream-representations of our 
thoughts present images that impress us as being life size; my dream-picture, however, is 
the reproduction of a wood-cut inserted in the text of an illustrated history of Austria, 
representing Maria Theresa in the Reichstag of Pressburg —the famous scene of Moriamur 
pro regenostro.¹ Like Maria Theresa, my father, in my dream, is surrounded by the 
multitude; but he is standing on one or two chairs (Stuhlen), and is thus, like a 
Stuhlrichter (presiding judge). (He has united them; here the intermediary is the phrase: 
"We shall need no judge.") Those of us who stood about my father's death-bed did actually 
notice that he looked very like Garibaldi. He had a post-mortem rise of temperature; his 
cheeks shone redder and redder involuntarily we continue: "And behind him, in unsub
¹[We die for our king.] I have forgotten in what author I found a reference to a dream 
which was over run with unusually small figures, the source of which proved to be one of 
the engravings of Jacques Callot, which the dreamer had examined during the day. These 
engravings contain an enormous number of very small figures; a whole series of them deals 
with the horrors of the Thirty Years War.
stantial (radiance), lay that which subdues us all—the common fate."
This uplifting of our thoughts prepares us for the fact that we shall have to deal with 
this common fate. The post-mortem rise in temperature corresponds to the words after his 
death in the dream-content. The most agonizing of his afflictions had been a complete 
paralysis of the intestines (obstruction) during the last few weeks of his life. All 
sorts of disrespectful thoughts associate themselves with this. One of my contemporaries, 
who lost his father while still at the Gymnasium—upon which occasion I was profoundly 
moved, and tendered him my friendship—once told me, derisively, of the-distress of a 
relative whose father had died in the street, and had been brought home, when it 
appeared, upon undressing the corpse, that at the moment of death, or post-mortem, an 
evacuation of the bowels (Stuhlentleerung) had taken place. The daughter was deeply 
distressed by this circumstance, because this ugly detail would inevitably spoil her 
memory of her father. We have now penetrated to the wish that is embodied in this dream. 
To stand after one's death before one's children great and undented who would not wish 
that? What now has become of the absurdity of this dream? The appearance of absurdity was 
due only to the fact that a perfectly permissible figure of speech, in which we are 
accustomed to ignore any absurdity that may exist as between its components, has been 
faithfully represented in the dream. Here again we can hardly deny that the appearance of 
absurdity is desired and has been purposely produced.
The frequency with which dead persons appear in our dreams as living and active and 
associating with us has evoked undue astonishment, and some curious explanations, which 
afford conspicuous proof of our misunderstanding of dreams. And yet the explanation of 
these dreams is close at hand. How often it happens that we say to ourselves: "If my 
father were still alive, what would he say to this?" The dream can express this if in no 
other way than by his presence in a definite situation. Thus, lor instance, a young man 
whose grandfather has left him a great inheritance dreams that the old man is alive, and 
calls his grandson to account, reproaching him for his lavish expenditure. What we regard 
as an objection to the dream on account of our better knowledge that the man is already 
dead, is in reality the consoling thought that the dead man does not need to learn the 
truth, or satisfaction over, the fact that he can no longer have a say in the matter.
Another form of absurdity found in dreams of deceased relatives does not express scorn 
and derision; it serves to express the extremest repudiation,; the representation of a 
suppressed thought which one would like to believe the very last thing one would think 
of. Dreams of this kind appear to be capable of solution only if we remember that a dream 
makes no distinction between desire and reality. For example, a man Who nursed his father 
during his last illness, and who felt his death very keenly, dreamed some time afterwards 
the following senseless dream: His father was again living, and conversing with him' as 
usual, but (and this was the remarkable thing) he had nevertheless died though he did 
riot know it: This dream is intelligible if, after he had nevertheless died, we insert in 
consequence of the dreamer's wish, and if after but he did not know it, we add that the 
dreamer had entertained this wish. While nursing him, the son had often wished that his 
father was dead; that is, he had had the really compassionate thought that it would be a 
good thing if death would at last put an end to his sufferings. While he was mourning his 
father's death, even this compassionate wish became an unconscious reproach, as though it 
had really contributed to shorten the sick man's life: By the awakening of the earliest 
infantile feelings against his father, it became possible to express this reproach as a 
dream; and it was precisely because of the extreme antithesis between the 
dream-instigator and the day-thoughts that this dream had to assume so absurd a form.¹
As a general thing, the dreams of a deceased person of whom the dreamer has been fond 
confront the interpreter with difficult problems, the solution of which is not always 
satisfying. The reason for this may be sought in the especially pronounced ambivalence of 
feeling which controls the relation of the dreamer to the dead person. In such dreams it 
is quite usual for the deceased person to be treated at first as living; then it suddenly 
appears that he is dead; and in the continuation of the dream he is once more living. 
This has a confusing effect. I at last divined that this alternation of death and life is 
intended to represent the in difference of the dreamer ("It is all One to me whether he 
is alive or dead"). This indifference, of course, is not real, but wished; its purpose is 
to help the dreamer to deny his very intense
¹Cf. "Formulations regarding the Two Principles in Mental Functioning," Collected 
Papers, iv.
and often contradictory emotional- attitudes, and so it becomes the dream-representation 
of his ambivalence. For other dreams in which one meets with deceased persons the 
following rule will often be a guide: If in the dream the dreamer is not reminded that 
the dead person is dead, he sets himself on a par with the dead; he dreams of his own 
death. The sudden realization or astonishment in the dream ("but he has long been dead!") 
is a protest against this identification, and rejects the meaning that the dreamer is 
dead. But I will admit that I feel that dream-interpretation is far from having elicited 
all the secrets of dreams having this content. 
III
In the example which I shall now cite, I can detect the dreams-work in the .act of 
purposely manufacturing an: absurdity for which there is no occasion whatever in the 
dream-material. It is taken from the dream which I had as a result of meeting Count Thun 
just before going away on a holiday. I am driving in a cab, and I tell the driver to 
drive to a railway station. "Of course, T can't drive with you on the railway track 
itself," I say, after the driver had reproached me, as though I had worn him out; at the 
same time, it seems as though I had al ready made with him a journey that one usually 
makes by train. Of this confused and senseless story analysis gives the following 
explanation. During the day I had hired a cab to take me to a demote street in Dornbach. 
The driver, however, did not know the way, and simply kept on driving, in the manner of 
such worthy people, until I became aware of the fact and showed him the way, indulging in 
a few derisive remarks. From this driver a train of thought led to the aristocratic 
personage whom I was to meet later on. For the present, I will only remark that one thing 
that strikes us middle-class plebeians about the aristocracy is that they like to put 
themselves in the driver's seat. Does not Count Thun guide the Austrian car of State? The 
next sentence in the dream, how ever, refers to my brother, whom I thus also identify 
with the cab-driver. I had refused to go to Italy with him this year (Of course, I can't 
drive with you on the railway track itself), and this refusal was a sort of punishment 
for his accustomed complaint that I usually wear him out on this tour (this finds its way 
into the dream unchanged) by rushing him too quickly from place to place, and making him 
see too many beautiful things in a single day. That evening my brother had accompanied me 
to the railway station, but shortly before the carriage had reached the Western station 
of the Metropolitan Railway he had jumped out in order to take the train to Purkers-dorf. 
I suggested to him that he might remain with me a little longer, as he did not travel to 
Purkers-dorf by the; Metropolitan but by the Western Railway. This is why, in my dream, I 
made in the cab a journey which one usually makes by train. In reality/ however, it was 
the other way about: what I told my brother was: "The distance which; you travel on 
the-Metropolitan Railway you could; travel in my company on the Western Railway.” The 
whole confusion of the dream is therefore due to the fact that in my dream I replace 
"Metropolitan Railway" by cab, which, to be sure does" good service in bringing the 
driver and my brother into conjunction. I then elicit from the dream some nonsense which 
fs hardly-disentangled by elucidation, and which almost constitutes a contradiction of my 
earlier speech (Of course, Can not drive with you on the railway track itself): Bubas I 
have no: excuse whatever for confronting the Metropolitan Railway' with the :cab, I must 
intentionally have given the whole enigmatical story this peculiar form in my dream.
But with what intention? We shall now learn what the absurdity in the dream signifies and 
the: motives which admitted it recreated it in this case the solution of the mystery is 
as follows: In the dream I need an absurdity, and something incomprehensible, in 
connection with driving (Fahren=riding, driving) because in the dream-thoughts I have a 
certain opinion that demands representation. One evening, at the house of the witty and 
hospitable lady who appears, in another scene of the same dream, as the housekeeper, I 
heard two riddles which I could not solve. As they were known to the other members of the 
party; I presented a somewhat ludicrous figure in my unsuccessful" attempts to find the 
solutions; They were two puns turning on the words Nackkommen (to obey orders-offspring) 
and Vorfahren (to drive—forefathers, ancestry). They ran, I believe, as follows:
The coachman does it
At the master’s behests;
Everyone has it;
In the grave it rests.
(Vorfahren)
A confusing detail was that the first halves of the two riddles were identical:
The coachman does it
At the master's behests;
Not everyone has it,
In the cradle it rests.
(Nachkommen)
When I saw Count Thun drive up (vorfahren) in state, and fell into the Figaro-like mood, 
in which one finds that the sole merit of such aristocratic gentlemen is that they have 
taken the trouble to be born (to- become Nachkommen), these two riddles became 
intermediary thoughts for. the. dream-work,, As aristocrats may readily be replaced by 
coachman, and since it was, once the custom to call a coachman Herr Schwager 
(brother-in-law), the work of condensation could involve my brother in the same 
representation. But the dream thought at work in the background is as follows: It is 
nonsense to be proud of one's ancestors (Vorfahren). I would rather be an ancestor 
(yorfahr) myself. On account of this opinion, it is nonsense, we have the nonsense in the 
dream. And no the last riddle in this obscure passage of the dream, is: solved-namely 
that I have driven before (vorher gefahren, vorgefahren) with this driver. 
Thus a dream is made absurd if there occurs in the dream-thoughts, as, one of the 
elements of the contents the opinion: "That is nonsense"; and, in general,; if criticisms 
and derision are the motives of one of the dreamer's unconscious trains of thought: 
Hence, absurdity is one of the means by which the dream work represents contradiction; 
another means is the inversion of material relation between the dream-thoughts and the 
dream-content; another is the employment of the feeling of motor inhibition. But the 
absurdity, of a dream is not to be translated by a simple no; it is intended to reproduce 
the tendency of the dream-thoughts to-express laughter or derision simultaneously with 
the contradiction. Only with this intention does the dream-work produce anything 
ridiculous; Here again it transforms a part of the latent content into a manifest form.¹
As a matter of fact j we have already cited
¹Here the dream-work parodies the thought which it qualifies as ridiculous, in that' it 
creates something ridiculous in relation to it. Heine does the same thing when he wishes 
to deride the bad rhymes of the King of Bavaria. He does it 'by using even worse rhymes:
Herr Ludwig ist ein grosser Poet 
Und singt er, so sturt Apollo 
Vor ihm auf die Knie una bittet und fleht,
Halt ein, ich werde sonst toll, ohl

a convincing example of this significance of an absurd dream. The dream (interpreted 
without analysis). of the Wagnerian performance which lasted until 7.45 a.m., and in 
which the orchestra is conducted from a tower, etc. (see p. 278), is obviously saying: It 
is a crazy world and an insane society. He who deserves a thing doesn't get it, and he 
who doesn't care for it does get it. In this way the dreamer compares her fate with that 
of her cousin. The fact that dreams of a dead father were the first to furnish us with 
examples of absurdity in dreams is by no means accidental. The conditions for the 
creation of absurd dreams are here grouped together in a typical fashion. The authority 
proper to the father has at; an early age evoked the criticism of the child, and the 
strict demands which he has made have caused the child, in self-defence, to pay 
particularly close attention to every weakness of his father's; but the piety with which 
the father's personality is surrounded in our thoughts, especially after his death; 
intensifies the censorship which prevents the expression of this criticism from becoming 
conscious;
Here is another absurd dream of a deceased Father:
I receive a communication from the town council of my native city concerning, the cost of 
accommodation in the hospital in 'the year 1851. This was necessitate by a seizure from 
which I was suffering. I make fun of the matter for, in the first place,! was not yet 
born in 1851, and in the second place, my father, to whom the communication might refer, 
is .al ready dead. I go to him in the adjoining room, where he is lying in bed, and tell 
him about it. To my surprise he remembers that in the year 1851 he was once drunk and had 
to be locked up or confined It was when he was working for the firm of T. "Then you, too 
used to drink?" I ask. "You married soon after?" I reckon that I was born in 1856, which 
seems to me to be immediately afterwards. 
In the light of the foregoing exposition, we shall translate the insistence with which 
this dream exhibits its: absurdities as a sure sign of a particularly embittered and 
passionate polemic in the dream-thoughts. AH the greater then, is our astonishment when 
we perceive that in this dream the polemic is waged openly, and that my father is denoted 
as the person who is made a laughing-stock. Such frankness seems to contradict our 
assumption of a censorship controlling the dream-work The explanation :is 1that here the 
father is only an interposed figure, while the quarrel is really with another person, Who 
appears in the dream only in a single allusion. Whereas a dream usually treats of revolt 
against other persons, behind whom the father is concealed, here it is the other way 
about: the father serves as the man of straw to represent another, and hence the dream 
dares to concern itself openly with a person who is usually-hallowed, because there is 
present the certain knowledge that he is not in reality intended. We learn of this 
condition of affairs by considering/the occasion/of the dream It was dreamed after I had 
heard that an older .colleague, whose judgment was considered infallible, had expressed 
disapproval and astonishment on hearing that' one of my patients had already been 
undergoing psycho-analytic treatment at my hands for five years. The introductory 
sentences of the dream allude in a transparently disguised manner to the fact that this 
colleague had for a time taken over the duties which my father could ^io longer perform 
(statement of expenses, accommodation in the hospital); and when bur friendly relations 
began to alter for the worse: I was thrown into: the same emotional conflict as that 
which' arises in the lease? of a misunderstanding between father and son (by reason of 
the part played by the father, and his earlier functions). The dream-thoughts now 
bitterly resent the reproach that I am not making better progress, which extends itself: 
from: the treatment of this patient to other things. Does my colleague know anyone who 
can get on any faster? Does he not know that conditions of this sort ate usually 
incurable and last for life? What are four or five years: in comparison to a whole 
lifetime, especially, when life has been made so much easier for the patient during the 
treatment?
The-impression of absurdity in this dream is brought about largely by the fact that 
sentences from different divisions of the dream-thoughts are strung together without any 
reconciling: transition. Thus, the-,sentence, I go to him in the adjoining room, etc., 
leaves the subject from which the preceding sentences are taken, and; faithfully 
reproduces the circumstances under which I told my father that I was engaged to be 
married; Thus the dream is trying to remind me of the .noble disinterested ness1 which 
the .old man showed at that 'time, and to contrast this with the conduct of an other 
newly-introduced person. I now perceive that the dream is allowed to make fun of my 
father because in the dream-thoughts, in the full recognition of his merits, he is held 
up as an example to others. It is in the nature of every censorship that one is permitted 
to tell untruths about forbidden things rather than the truth. The next sentence, to the 
effect that my father remembers that he was once drunk, and was locked up  in 
consequence, contains nothing that really relates to my father any more. The person who 
is screened by him is here a no less important personage than the great Meynert, in whose 
footsteps I followed with such veneration, and whose attitude towards me after a short 
period of favouritism, changed into one of undisguised hostility. The dream recalls to me 
his own statement that in his youth he had at one time formed the habit of intoxicating 
himself with chloroform, with the result that he had to enter a sanatorium; and also my 
second experience with him, shortly before his death. I had an embittered literary 
controversy with him in reference to masculine hysteria, the existence of which he 
denied, and when I visited him during his last illness, and asked him how he felt, he 
described his condition at some length, and concluded with the words: "You know, I have 
always been one of the prettiest cases of masculine hysteria." Thus, to my satisfaction, 
and to my astonishment, he admitted what he so long and so stubbornly denied. But the 
fact that in this scene of my dream I can use my father to screen Meynert is explained 
not by any discovered analogy between the two persons, but by the fact that it is the 
brief yet perfectly adequate representation of a conditional sentence in the dream 
thoughts which, if fully expanded, would read as follows: "Of course, if I belonged to 
the second generation, if I were the son of a professor or a privy council or, I should 
have progressed more rapidly." In my dream I make my father a professor and a privy 
council or. The most obvious and most annoying absurdity of the dream lies in the 
treatment of the date 1851, which seems to me to be indistinguishable from 1856, as 
though a difference of five years meant nothing whatever. But it is just this one of the 
dream-thoughts that requires expression. Four or five years—that is precisely the 
length of time during which I enjoyed the support of the colleague mentioned at the 
outset; but it is also the duration of time I kept my fiancee waiting before I married 
her; and by a coincidence that is eagerly exploited by the dream-thoughts, it is also the 
time I have kept my oldest patient waiting for a complete cure. "What are five years?" 
ask the dream-thoughts. "That is no time at all to me, that isn't worth consideration. I 
have time enough ahead of me, and just as what you wouldn't believe came true at last, so 
I shall accomplish this also." Moreover, the number 51, when considered apart from the 
number of the century, is determined in yet another manner and in an opposite sense; for 
which reason it occurs several times over in the dream. It is the age at which man seems 
particularly exposed to danger; the age at which I have seen colleagues die suddenly, 
among them one who had been appointed a few days earlier to a professorship for which he 
had long been waiting.
V
Another absurd dream which plays with figures: An acquaintance of mine, Herr M, has been 
attacked in an essay by no less a person than Goethe and, as we all think, with 
unjustifiable vehemence. Herr M is, of course, crushed by this attack. He complains of it 
bitterly at a dinner-party; but his veneration for Goethe has not suffered as a result of 
this personal experience. I try to elucidate the temporal relations a little, as they 
seem improbable to me. Goethe died in 1832; since his attack upon lift must, of course, 
have taken place earlier, M was at the time quite a young man, ft seems plausible to me 
that he was 18 years old. But I do not know exactly what the date of the present year is, 
and so the whole calculation lapses into obscurity. The attack, by the way, is contained 
in Goethe's well-known essay on "Nature."
We shall soon find the means of justifying the nonsense of this dream. Herr M, with whom 
I became acquainted at a dinner-party, had recently asked me to examine his brother, who 
showed signs of general paralysis. The conjecture was right; the painful thing about this 
visit was that the patient gave his brother away by alluding to his youthful pranks, 
though our conversation gave him no occasion to do so. I had asked the patient to tell me 
the year of his birth, and had repeatedly got him to make trifling calculations in order 
to show the weakness of his memory—which tests, by the way he passed quite well. Now I 
can see that I behave like, a paralytic in the dream (I do not know exactly what the date 
of the present year is). Other material of the dream is drawn from another recent source. 
The editor of a medical periodical, a friend of mine, had accepted for his paper a very 
unfavourable crushing review of the last book of my Berlin friend, Fl, the critic being a 
very youthful reviewer, who was not very competent to pass judgment. I thought I had a 
right to interfere, and called the editor to account; he greatly regretted his acceptance 
of the review, but he would not promise any redress. I thereupon broke off toy relations 
With the periodical, and in my letter of resignation I expressed the hope that our 
personal relations would not suffer as a result of the incident. The third source of this 
dream is an account given by a female patient—it was fresh in my memory at the 
time—of the psychosis of her brother who had fallen into a frenzy crying "Nature, 
Nature." The physicians in at tendance thought that the cry was derived from a reading of 
Goethe's beautiful essay, and that it pointed to the patient's overwork in the study of 
natural philosophy. I thought, rather, of the sexual meaning in which even our less 
cultured people use the word Nature, and the fact that the unfortunate man afterwards 
mutilated his genitals seems to show that I was not far wrong. Eighteen years was the age 
of this patient at the time of this access of frenzy.
If I add, further, that the book of my so severely criticized friend ("One asks oneself 
whether the author or oneself is crazy" had been the opinion of another critic) treats of 
the temporal conditions of hie, and refers the duration of Goethe's life to the multiple 
of a number significant from the biological point of view, it will readily be admitted 
that in my dream I am putting myself in my friend's place. (I try to elucidate the 
temporal relations a little.) But I behave like a paretic, and the dream revels in 
absurdity. This means that the dream thoughts say ironically: "Naturally, he is the fool, 
the lunatic, and you are the clever people who know better. Perhaps, however, it is. the 
other way about?" Now, the other way about is abundantly represented in my dream, 
inasmuch as Goethe has attacked the young man, which is absurd, while it is perfectly 
possible even today for a young fellow to attack the immortal Goethe; and inasmuch as I 
reckon from the year of Goethe's death, while I made the paretic reckon from the year of 
his birth. 
But I have further promised to show that no dream is inspired by other than egoistical 
motives. Accordingly, I must account for the fact that in this dream I make my friend's 
cause my own, and put myself in his place. My critical conviction in waking life would 
not justify my doing so. Now, the story of the eighteen year-old patient, and the 
divergent interpretations of his cry, "Nature," allude to the fact that I have put myself 
into opposition to the majority of physicians by claiming a sexual aetiology for the 
psychoneuroses. I may say to myself: "You will meet with the same kind of criticism as 
your friend; indeed you have al ready done so to some extent"; so that I may now replace 
the he in the dream-thoughts by we. "Yes, you are right; we two are the fools." That mea 
res agitur is clearly shown by the mention of the short, incomparably beautiful essay of 
Goethe's, for it was a popular lecture on this essay which induced me to study the 
natural sciences when I left the Gymnasium, and was still undecided as to my future.
VI
I have to show that yet another dream in which my ego does not appear is none the less 
egoistic. On p. 249 I referred to a short dream in which Professor M says: "My son, the 
myopic . . ."; and I stated that this was only a preliminary dream, preceding another in 
which I play a part. Here is the main dream, previously omitted, which challenges us to 
explain its absurd and unintelligible word-formation.
On account of something or other that is happening in Rome, it is necessary for the 
children to flee, and this they do. The scene is then laid before a gate a double gate in 
the ancient style (the Porta Romana in Siena, as I realize while I am dreaming). I am 
sitting on the edge of a well, and lam greatly depressed; J am almost weeping. A 
woman—a nurse, a nun —brings out the two boys and hands them, over to their father, 
who is not myself. The elder is distinctly my eldest son, but I do not see the face of 
the other boy. The woman asks the eldest boy for a parting kiss. She is remarkable for a 
red nose. The boy refuses her the kiss, but says to her, extending her his hand in 
parting, “Auf Geseres," and to both of ns (or to one of us) "Auf Ungeseres." I have the 
idea that this indicates a preference.
This dream is built upon a tangle of thoughts induced by a play I saw at the theatre, 
called Das neue Ghetto (The New Ghetto), The Jewish question, anxiety as to the future of 
my children, who cannot be given a fatherland, anxiety as to educating them so that they 
may enjoy the privileges of citizen-all these features may easily be recognized in the 
accompanying dream-thoughts.
"By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept." Siena* like Rome, is famous for its 
beautiful fountains. In the dream I have to find some sort of substitute for Rome (cf. p. 
217) from among localities which are. known to me. Near the Porta Romana of Siena we saw 
a large, brightly-lit building, which, we learned was the Manicomio, the insane asylum. 
Shortly before the dream I had heard that a co-religionist had been forced to resign a 
position, which he had secured with great effort, in a State asylum.
Our interest is aroused by the speech: "Auf Geseres," where one might expect, from the 
situation continued throughout the dream, "Auf Wiedersehen'" (Au revoir), and by its 
quite meaningless antithesis: "Auf Ungeseres." (Un is a prefix meaning "not.")
According to information received from He brew scholars, Geseres is a genuine Hebrew 
word, derived from the verb goiser;.and may best be rendered by "ordained sufferings, 
fated disaster." From its employment in the Jewish jargon one would take it to mean 
"wailing and lamentation." Ungeseres is a coinage of my own, and is the first to attract 
my attention, but for the present it baffles me; The little observation at the end of the 
dream—that Ungeseres indicates an advantage over Geseres —Opens the way to the 
associations, and there with to understanding. This relation holds good in the case of 
caviar; the unsalted kind is more highly prized than the salted. "Caviar to the 
general"—"noble passions." Herein lies concealed a jesting allusion to a member of my 
household, of Whom I hope—€or she is younger than I—that she will watch over the 
future of my children; this, too, agrees with the fact that another member of my 
household, our worthy nurse, is clearly indicated by the nurse (or nun) of the dream. But 
a connecting-link is Wanting between the pair, salted^-unsalted and Geseres—Ungeseres. 
This is to be found in gesduert and ungesauert Ravened, and unleavened) In their flight 
or exodus from Egypt the children of Israel had not time to allow their dough to become 
leavened, and in commemoration of this event they eat unleavened bread at Passover to 
this day. Here, too, I can find room for the sudden association which occurred to me in 
this part of the analysis. I remembered how we, my friend from Berlin and myself, had 
strolled about the streets of Breslau; a city which was strange to us, during the last 
days of Easter. A little girl asked me the way to a certain street; I had to tell her 
that I did riot know it; I then remarked to my friend, "I hope that later on in life the 
child will show more perspicacity in selecting the persons whom she allows to direct 
her." Shortly afterwards a sign caught my eye: "Dr. Herod, consulting hours.,." I said to 
myself: "I hope this colleague; does not happen to be a children's specialist,'' 
Meanwhile, my friend had been developing his views on the biological significance of 
bilateral symmetry, and had begun a sentence with the words: "If we had only one eye in 
the middle of the forehead, like Cyclops . . ."This leads us to the speech of the 
professor in the-preliminary dream: "My son, the myopic." And now I have been led to the 
chief source for Geseres. Many years ago, when this son of Professor M's,. who is today 
an independent thinker,: was still sitting on his school-bench, he contracted 
an-affection of the eye which, according to: the doctor, gave some cause for anxiety. He 
expressed the opinion that is so long as it was confined to one eye it was of no great 
significance, but that if it should extend to the other eye it would be serious. The 
affection subsided in the one eye without leaving any ill effects; shortly after wards, 
however-the same symptoms did actually appear in the other eye. The boy's terrified 
mother immediately summoned the physician to her distant home in the country. But the 
doctor was now of a different opinion (took the other side). "What sort of 'Geseres’ is 
this you are making?'* he asked the mother, impatiently, "If one side got well the other 
will, too." And so it turned out.
And now as to the connection between this and myself and my family. The school-bench upon 
which Professor M's son learned his first lessons has become the property of my" eldest 
son; it was given to him by the boy's mother, and it is into his mouth that I put the 
words of farewell in the dream; One of the: wishes that may be connected with this 
transference may now be readily guessed. This school-bench is intended by its 
construction to guard the child from becoming shortsighted and one sided. Hence myopia 
(and behind it the Cyclops), and the discussion about bilateralism. The fear of 
one-sidedness has a twofold significance; it might mean hot only physical one-sidedness, 
but intellectual one-sidedness also. Does it not seem as though the Scene in the dreamy 
with all its craziness, were contradicting precisely this anxiety? When on the one hand 
the boy has spoken his words of farewell, on the other hand he calls out the very 
opposite, as though to establish an equilibrium. He is acting as it were, in obedience to 
bilateral symmetry!
Thus, a dream frequently has the profoundest meaning in the places where it seems most 
absurd. In all ages those who have had some thing to say and have been unable to say it 
with out danger to themselves have gladly donned the cap and bells. He for whom the 
forbidden saving was intended was more likely to tolerate it if he was able to laugh at 
it, and to flatter himself with the comment that what he disliked was obviously absurd, 
Dreams behave in real Hie as does the prince in the play who is obliged to pretend to be 
a madman, and hence we may say of dreams what Hamlet said of himself, substituting an 
unintelligible jest for the actual truth: "I am but mad north-northwest; when the wind is 
southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw" (Act II, sc, ii).¹
Thus, my solution of the problem of absurdity in dreams is that the; dream-thoughts are 
never absurd—at least, not those of the dreams of; sane persons—and that the 
dream-work pro duces, absurd dreams and dream with individually absurd elements, when the 
dream-thoughts contain criticism, ridicule, and derision;, which; have to be given 
expression. My next Concern is to show that the: dream-work is exhausted by the 
co-operation of the three factors enumerated—and of a fourth which has still to be 
mentioned—that it does no more than translate the dream thoughts, observing: the four 
conditions prescribed, and that the question whether the mind goes to work in dreams with 
all its intellectual faculties, or with only part of them, is wrongly stated, and does 
not meet the actual state of affairs. But since there are plenty of dreams in which 
judgments are passed, criticisms made, and ,facts recognized. in which astonishment at 
some individual element of the dream appears, and explanations are attempted, and 
arguments adduced, I must meet the objections deriving from these occurrences by the 
citation of selected examples.
My answer is as follows: Everything in dreams which occurs as the apparent functioning of 
the critical faculty is to be regarded, not as the intellectual performance of the dream
¹This dream furnishes a good example in support of the universally valid doctrine that 
dreams of the same night, even though they are separated in the memory, spring from the 
same thought-material. The dream-situation in which I am rescuing, my children from the 
city of Rome; moreover, Is distorted by a reference back to an episode of my .childhood; 
The meaning is that I envy certain relatives who years ago had occasion to transplant 
their children to the soil of another country.
work, but as belonging to the substance of the dream-thoughts, and it has found its way 
from these, as a completed structure, into the manifest dream-content. I may go even 
farther than this! I may even say that the judgments which are passed upon the dream as 
it is remembered after waking, and the feelings which are aroused by the reproduction of 
the dream, belong largely to the latent dream-content and must be fitted into place in 
the interpretation of the dream.
1. One striking example of this has: already been given. A female patient does not wish 
to relate her dream because it was too vague. She saw a person in the dream, and does not 
.know whether it was her husband or her father: Then follows a second dream-fragment, in- 
which there occurs a manure-pail, with which the following reminiscence is associated. As 
a young housewife she once declared jestingly, in the presence of a young male, relative 
who frequented the house, that her next business would be to picture a new manure pail. 
Next morning one was sent to her, but it was filled with lilies of the valley. This part 
of the dream-served to represent the phrase, "Not grown on my own manure;"² If we 
complete the analysis, we find in the dream-thoughts the after-effect of  a story heard 
in youth; namely, that a girl had given birth to a child and that it was not clear who 
was the father. The dream-representation here; overlaps into the waking thought, and 
allows one of the elements of the dream thoughts to be represented by a judgment, formed 
in the waking state, of the whole dream.
2. A similar case: One of my patients has a dream which strikes him as being an 
interesting one, for he says to himself, immediately after walking: "I must tell that to 
the doctor." The dream is analysed, and shows the most distinct allusion to an affair in 
which he had become involved during the treatment, and of which he had decided to tell me 
nothing.³
3. Here is a third example from my own experience:
I go to the hospital with P, through a neighbourhood in which there are houses and 
gardens. Thereupon I have an idea that I have
²This German expression is equivalent to our saying: "l am not responsible for that," 
"That's not my funeral,'' or "That's not due to my own efforts,"—TR.
³The. injunction or resolve already contained, in the dream: "I must tell that to the 
doctor," when it occurs in dreams during psycho-analytic treatment, is constantly 
accompanied by a great resistance to confessing the dream, and is hot infrequently 
followed by the forgetting of the dream.

already seen this locality several times in my dreams; I do not know my way very well; P 
shows me a way which leads round a corner to a restaurant (indoor); here I ask for Frau 
Doni, and I hear that she is living at the back of the house, in a small room, with three 
children. I go there, and on the way I meet an un defined person with, my two little 
girls. After I have been with them for awhile,! take them with me. A sort of reproach 
against my wife for having left them there.
On waking I am conscious of a great satisfaction, whose motive seems to be the fact that 
I shall now learn from the analysis what is meant by / have already dreamed of this.² 
But the analysis of the dream tells me nothing about this; it shows me only that the 
satisfaction belongs to the latent dream-content, and not to a judgment of the dream. It 
is satisfaction concerning the fact that I have had children by my marriage. P's path 
through life and my own ran parallel for a time; how he has outstripped me both socially 
and financially, but his marriage has remained childless. Of this the two occasions of 
the dream give proof on complete analysis. On the previous day I had read in the 
newspaper the obituary notice of a certain Frau Dona A—y (which I turn into Doni), who 
had died in childbirth; I was told by my wife that the dead woman had been nursed by the 
same midwife whom she herself had employed at the birth of our two youngest boys, The 
name Dona had caught my attention, for I had recently met with it for the first time in 
an English novel. The other occasion for the dream may be found in the date on which it 
was dreamed; this was the night before the birthday of my eldest boy, who, it seems, is 
poetically gifted.
4. The same satisfaction remained with me after waking from the absurd dream that my 
father, after his death, had played a political role-among the Magyars. It is motivated 
by the persistence of the feeling which accompanied the last sentence of the dream: / 
remember that on his deathbed he looked so like Garibaldi, and I am glad that it has 
really come true,..(Followed by a forgotten continuation.) I can now supply from the 
analysis what should fill this gap. It is the mention of my second boy, to whom I have 
given the baptismal name of an eminent historical personage who attracted me greatly 
during my boyhood, espe
¹A subject which has been extensively discussed in recent volumes of the Revue 
Philosophique (paramnesia in dreams).
daily during my stay in England. I had to wait for a year before I could fulfil my 
intention of using this name if the next child should be a son, and with great 
satisfaction I greeted him by this name as soon as he was born. It is easy to see how the 
father's suppressed desire for greatness is, in his thoughts, transferred to his 
children; one is inclined to believe that this is one of the ways by which the 
suppression of this desire (which becomes necessary in the course of life) is effected. 
The little fellow Won his right to inclusion in the text of this dream by virtue of the 
fact that the same accident—that of soiling his clothes (quite pardonable in either a 
child or in a dying person)—had occurred to him. Compare with this the allusion 
Stuhlrichter (presiding judge) and the wish of the dream: to stand before one's children 
great and undefiled.
5. If I should now have to look for examples of judgments or expressions of opinion which 
remain in the dream itself, and are not continued in, or transferred to, our walking 
thoughts, my task would be greatly facilitated were I to take my examples from dreams 
which have already been cited for other purposes. The dream of Goethe's attack On Herr M 
appears to contain quite a number of acts of judgment. I try to elucidate the temporal 
relations a little, as they seem improbable to me. Does not this look like a critical 
impulse directed against the nonsensical idea that Goethe should have made a literary 
attack upon a young man of my acquaintance? It seems plausible to me that he was 18 years 
old. That sounds quite like the result of a calculation, though a silly one; and the / do 
not know exactly what is the date of the present year would be an example of uncertainty 
or doubt in dreams.
But I know from analysis that these acts of judgment, which seem to have been performed 
in the dream for the first time, admit of a different construction, in the light of which 
they become indispensable for interpreting the dream, while at the same time all 
absurdity is avoided. With the sentence I try to elucidate the temporal relations a 
little, I put myself in the place of my friend, who is actually trying to elucidate the 
temporal relations of life. The sentence then loses its significance as a judgment 
which-objects to the nonsense of the; previous sentences. The interposition, Which seems 
improbable to me, belongs to the following: It seems plausible to me. With almost these 
identical words' I replied to the lady who told me of her brother's illness: "It seems 
improbable to me" that- the-cry of "Mature, Nature," was in any way connected with 
Goethe; it seems much more plausible to me that it has the sexual significance which is 
known to you. In this case, it is true, a judgment was expressed, but in reality, not in 
a dream, and on an occasion which is remembered and utilized by the dream-thoughts. The 
dream-content appropriates this judgment like any other fragment of the dream-thoughts. 
The number 18 with which the judgment in the dream is meaninglessly connected still 
retains a trace of the context from which the real judgment was taken. Lastly, the I do 
not know exactly what is the date of the present year is intended for no other purpose 
than that of my identification with the paralytic, in examining whom this particular fact 
was established.
In the solution of these apparent acts of judgment in dreams, it will be well to keep in 
mind the above-mentioned rule of interpretation, which tells us that we must disregard 
the coherence which is established in the dream between its constituent parts as an 
unessential phenomenon, and- that every dream-element must be taken separately and traced 
back to its source. The dream is a compound, which for the purposes of investigation must 
be broken up into its elements. On the other hand, we become alive to the fact that there 
is a psychic force which expresses itself in our dreams and establishes this apparent 
coherence; that is, the material obtained by the dreamwork undergoes a secondary 
elaboration. Here we have the manifestations of that psychic force which we shall 
presently take into consideration as the fourth of the factors which co-operate in 
dream-formation.
6. Let us now look for other examples of acts of judgment in the dreams which have 
already been cited. In the absurd dream about the communication from the town council, I 
ask the question, "You married soon after?" I reckon that I was born in 1856, which seems 
to me to be directly afterwards. This certainly takes the form of an inference. My father 
married shortly after his attack, in the year 1851. I am the eldest son, born in 1856; so 
this is correct. We know that this inference has in fact been falsified by the 
wish-fulfilment, and that the sentence which dominates the dream thoughts is as follows: 
Four or five years—that is no time at all—that need not be counted. But every part of 
this chain of reasoning may be seen to be otherwise determined from the dream-thoughts, 
as regards both its content and its form. It is the patient of whose patience my 
colleague complains who intends to marry immediately the treatment is ended. The manner 
in which I converse with my father in this dream reminds me of an examination or cross 
examination, and thus of a university professor who was in the habit of compiling a 
complete docket of personal data when entering his pupils' names: You were born 
when?—1856.— Patre?—Then the applicant gave the Latin form of the baptismal name of 
the father and we students assumed that the Hofrat drew inferences from the father's name 
which the baptismal name of the candidate would not always have justified. Hence, the 
drawing of inferences in the dream would be merely the repetition of the drawing of 
inferences which appears as a scrap of material in the dream thoughts. From this we learn 
something new. If an inference occurs in the dream-content, it assuredly comes from the 
dream-thoughts; but it may be contained in these as a fragment of remembered material, or 
it may serve as the logical connective of a series of dream-thoughts. In any case, an 
inference in the dream represents an inference taken from the dream thoughts.¹
It will be well to continue the analysis of this dream at this point. With the 
inquisition of the professor is associated the recollection of an index (in my time 
published in Latin) of the university students; and further, the recollection of my own 
course of study. The five years allowed for the study of medicine were, as usual, too 
little for me. I worked unconcernedly for some years longer; my acquaintances regarded me 
as a loafer, and doubted whether I should get through. Then, suddenly, decided to take my 
examinations, and I got through in spite of the postponement. A fresh confirmation of the 
dream-thoughts with which I defiantly meet my critics: "Even though you won't believe it, 
because I am taking my time, I shall reach the conclusion (Germany, Schluss=end, 
conclusion, inference). It has often happened like that."
In its introductory portion, this dream contains several sentences which, we can hardly 
deny, are of the nature of an argument. And this argument is not at all absurd; it might
¹These results correct at several points my earlier statements concerning the 
representation of logical relations (p. 265). These described the general procedure of 
the dream-work, but overlooked its most delicate and most careful operations.
just as Well occur m my waking thoughts. In my dream I make fun of the communication from 
the town council, for in the first place I was not yet born in 1851, and in the second 
place my father, to whom it might refer, is already dead. Not only is each of these 
statements perfectly correct in itself, but they are the very arguments that I should 
employ if I received such a communication. We know from the foregoing analysis (p. 309) 
that this dream has sprung from the soil of deeply embittered and scornful 
dream-thoughts; and if we may also assume that the motive of the censorship is a very 
powerful One, we shall understand that the dream thought has every occasion to create a 
flawless refutation of an unreasonable demand, in accordance with the pattern contained 
in the dream-thoughts. But the analysis shows that in this case the dream-work has not 
been required to make a free imitation, but that material taken from the dream-thoughts 
had to be employed for the purpose. It is as though in an algebraic equation there should 
occur, besides the figures, plus and minus signs, and symbols of powers and of roots, and 
as though someone, in copying this equation, without understanding it, should copy both 
the symbols and the figures, and. mix them all up together. The two arguments may be 
traced to the following material: It is painful to me to think that many of the 
hypotheses upon which" I base my psychological solution of the psycho neuroses will 
arouse scepticism and ridicule when they first become known. For instance, I shall have 
to assert that impressions of the second year of life, and even the first, leave an 
enduring trace upon the emotional life of. subsequent neuropaths, and that these 
impressions —although greatly distorted and exaggerated by the memory—may furnish the 
earliest and profoundest basis of a hysterical symptom. Patients to whom I explain this 
at a suitable moment are wont, to parody my explanation by offering to search for 
reminiscences of the period when they were not yet born. My disclosure of the unsuspected 
part played by the father in the earliest sexual impulses of female patients may well 
have a similar reception. (Cf. the discussion on p. 244). Nevertheless, it is my 
well-founded conviction that both doctrines are true. In confirmation of this I recall 
certain examples in which the death of the father occurred when the child was very young, 
and subsequent incidents,- otherwise inexplicable, proved that the child had 
unconsciously preserved recollections of the person who had so early gone out of its 
life. I know that both my assertions are based upon inferences whose validity Will be 
attacked. It is the doing of the wish-fulfilment that precisely the material of those 
inferences, which I fear will be contested, should be utilized by the dream-work for 
establishing incontestable conclusions. 
7. In one dream, which I have hitherto only touched upon, astonishment at the subject 
emerging is distinctly expressed at the outset. The elder Brucke must have set me some 
task or other; strangely enough, it relates to the preparation of the lower part of my 
own body, the pelvis and legs, which I see before me as though in the dissecting-room, 
but without feeling the absence of part of my body, and without a trace of horror. Louise 
N is standing beside me, and helps me in the work. The pelvis is eviscerated; now the 
upper, now the lower aspect is visible, and the two aspects are commingled. Large fleshy 
red tubercles are visible (which, even in the dream, make me think of haemorrhoids). Also 
something lying over them had to be carefully picked off; it looked like crumpled 
tinfoil.¹ Then I was once more in possession of my legs, and I made a journey through 
the city, but I took a cab (as I was tired). To my astonishment, the cab drove into the 
front door of a house, which opened and allowed it to pass into a corridor, which was 
broken off at the end, and eventually led on into: the open.² Finally I wandered through 
changing landscapes, with an Alpine guide, who carried my things. He carried me for some 
distance, out of consideration for my tired legs.. The ground was swampy; we went along 
the edge; people were sitting on the ground, like Red Indians or gypsies; among them a 
girl. Until then I had made my way along on the slippery ground, in constant astonishment 
that I was so well able to do so after making the preparation. At last we came to a small 
wooden house with an open window at one end. Here the guide set me down, and laid two 
planks, which stood in readiness, on the. window-sill so as to bridge the chasm which had 
to be crossed from the window. Now I grew really alarmed about my legs. Instead of the 
expected crossing, I saw two grown-up-men lying upon wooden benches which were fixed on 
the walls of the hut, and something like two
¹Stanniol, allusion to Stannius; the nervous system of fishes; cf. p. 300.
²The place in the corridor of my apartment-house where the perambulators of the other 
tenants stand; it is also otherwise hyper-determined several times over.

Sleeping children next to them; as though not the planks but the children were intended 
to make the crossing possible. I awoke with terrified thoughts
Anyone who has-been duly impressed by the extensive nature of dream-condensation will 
readily imagine what a number of pages the exhaustive analysis of this dream would fill. 
Fortunately for the context, I shall make: this dream only the one example of 
astonishment in dreams, which makes its appearance in the parenthetical remark, strangely 
enough; Let us consider the occasion of the dream. It is a visit of this lady, Louise N, 
who helps me with my work in the dream. She says: "Lend me something to read.” I offer 
her She, by Rider Haggard; A strange book, but full of hidden meaning,” I try to 
explain; "the eternal feminine, the immortality of our emotions-" Here she interrupts me: 
"I know that book already. Haven't you something of your own?" "No, my own immortal works 
are still unwritten."
"Well, when are you going to publish your so called 'latest revelations’ which, you 
promised us, even we should be able to read?" she asks, rather sarcastically. I now 
perceive that she is a mouthpiece for someone else, and I am silent; I think of the 
effort it cost me to make public even my work on dreams, in which I had to surrender so 
much of my own intimate nature. ("The best that you know you can't tell the boys.") The 
preparation of my own body which I am ordered to make in my dream is thus the 
self-analysis involved in the communication of my dreams. The elder Brucke very properly 
finds a place here; in the first years of my scientific work it so happened that I 
neglected the publication of a certain discovery until his insistence forced me to 
publish it. But the further trains of thought, proceeding from my conversation with 
Louise N, go too deep to become conscious; they are side tracked by way of the material 
which has been incidentally awakened in me by the mention of Rider Haggard's She. The 
comment strangely enough applies to this book, and to another by the same author, The 
Heart of the World; and numerous elements of the dream are taken from these two fantastic 
romances. The swampy ground over which the dreamer is carried, the chasm which has to be 
crossed by means of planks, come from She; the Red Indians, the girl, and the wooden 
house, from The Heart of the World. In both novels a woman is the leader, and both treat 
of perilous wanderings; She has to do with an adventurous journey to an undiscovered, 
country, a place almost untrodden by the foot of man. According to a note which I find in 
my record of the dream, the fatigue in my legs was a real sensation from those days^^^^ 
Probably a weary mood corresponded with this fatigue, and the doubting question: "How 
much farther will my legs carry me?" In She, the end of the adventure is that the heroine 
meets her death in the mysterious central fire, instead of winning immortality for 
herself and for others. Some related anxiety has mistakably arisen in the dream-thoughts. 
The wooden house is assuredly also a coffin—that is, the grave. But in representing 
this most unwished-for of all thoughts by means of a wish-fulfilment, the dream-work has 
achieved its masterpiece. I was once in a grave, but it was an empty Etruscan grave near 
Orvieto—a narrow chamber with two stone benches on the walls, upon Which were lying the 
skeletons of two adults;- The interior of the wooden house in the dream looks exactly 
like this grave, except that stone has been re placed by wood. The dream seems to say: 
"If you must already sojourn in your grave, let it be this Etruscan grave," and by means 
of this interpolation it transforms the most mournful expectation into one that is really 
to be desired. Unfortunately, as we shall learn, the dream is able to change into its 
opposite only the idea accompanying an affect, but not always the affect itself. Hence, I 
awake with thoughts of terror, even after the idea that perhaps my children will achieve 
what has been denied to their father has forced its way to representation: a fresh 
allusion to the strange romance in which the identity of a character is preserved through 
a series of generations covering two thousand years.
8. In the context of another dream there is a similar expression of astonishment at what 
is experienced in the dream. This, however, is connected with such a striking, 
far-fetched, and almost intellectual attempt at explanation that if only on this account 
I should have to subject the whole dream to analysis, even if it did not possess two 
other interesting features. On the night of the eighteenth pf July I was travelling on 
the Southern Railway, and in my sleep I heard someone call out: "Hollthurn, 10 minutes." 
I immediately think of Holothuria—of a natural history museum—that here is a place 
where valiant men have vainly resisted the domination of their overlord.— Yes, the 
counter-reformation in Austria.!—As though it were a place in Styria or the-Tyrol.
Now I see indistinctly a small museum, in which the relics or the acquisitions of these 
men are preserved. I should like to leave the train, but I hesitate to do so. There are 
women with fruit on the platform; they squat on the ground, and in that position 
invitingly hold up their baskets.-—I hesitated, in doubt as to whether we have time, 
but here we are still stationary.—I am suddenly in another compartment, in which the 
leather and the seats are so narrow that one’s spine directly touches the back.¹ I am 
surprised at this, but I may have changed carriages while asleep. Several people, among 
them an English brother and sister; a row mf books plainly on a shelf on the wall.—I 
see The Wealth of Nations, and Matter and Motion- (by Maxwell), thick books bound in 
brown linen. The man asks his sister about a book of Schiller's, whether she has 
forgotten it. These books seem to belong now to me, now to them. At this point I wish to 
join in the conversation in order to confirm or support what is being said ... I wake 
sweating all over, because all the windows are shut. The train stops at Marburg.
While writing down the dream, a part of it occurs to me which my memory wished to pass 
over. I tell the brother and sister (in English), referring to a certain book: "It is 
from . . ." but I correct myself: "It is by . . ." The man remarks to his sister: "He 
said it correctly."
The dream begins with the name of a station, which seems to have almost waked me. For 
this name, which was Marburg, I substitute Hollthurn. The fact that I heard Marburg the 
first, or perhaps the second time it was called out, is proved by the mention of Schiller 
in the dream; he was born in Marburg, though not the Styrian Marburg.² Now on this 
occasion, although I was travelling first class, I was doing so under very disagreeable 
circumstances. The train was overcrowded; in my compartment I had come upon a lady and 
gentleman who seemed very fine people, and had not the good breeding, or did not think it 
worth while, to conceal their displeasure at my intrusion. My polite greeting was not 
returned, and al
¹This description is not intelligible even to myself, but I follow the principle of 
reproducing the dream m those words which occur to me while I am writing it down. The 
wording itself is a part of the dream representation.
²Schiller was not born in one of the Marburgs, but in Marbach, as every German schoolboy 
knows, and as I myself knew. This again is one of those errors (cf. p. 218) which creep 
in as substitutes for an intentional falsification in another place and which I have 
endeavoured.to explain in The Psycho-pathology of Everyday Life.

though they were sitting side by side (with their backs to the engine), the woman before 
my eyes hastened to pre-empt the seat opposite her, and next to the window, with her 
umbrella; the door was immediately closed, and pointed remarks about the opening of 
windows were exchanged. Probably I was quickly recognized as a person hungry for fresh 
air. It was a hot night, and the atmosphere of the compartment, closed on both sides, was 
almost suffocating. My experience as a traveller leads me to believe that such 
inconsiderate and overbearing conduct marks people who have paid for their tickets only 
partly, or not at all. When the conductor came round and I presented my dearly bought 
ticket, the lady exclaimed haughtily and almost threateningly: "My husband has a pass." 
She was an imposing-looking person, with a discontented expression, in age not far 
removed from the autumn of feminine beauty; the man had no chance to say anything; he sat 
there motionless. I tried to sleep. In my dream I take a terrible revenge on my 
disagreeable travelling companions; no one would suspect what insults and humiliations 
are concealed behind the disjointed fragments of the first half of the dream. After this 
need has been satisfied, the second wish, to exchange my compartment for another, makes 
itself felt. Thedream changes its scene so often, and without making the slightest 
objection to such changes, that it would not have seemed at all remarkable had I at once, 
from my memories, replaced my travelling companions by more agreeable persons. But here 
was a case where something or other opposes the change: of scene, and finds it necessary 
to explain it. How did I suddenly get into another compartment? I could not postively 
remember having changed carriages. So there was only one explanation. I must have left 
the carriage while asleep—an unusual occurrence, examples of which, however, are known 
to neuropathologists. We know of persons who undertake rail way journeys in a crepuscular 
state, without betraying their abnormal condition by any sign whatever, until at some 
stage of their journey they come to themselves, and are surprised by the gap in their 
memory. Thus, while I am still dreaming, I declare my own case to be such a case of 
automatisme ambulatoire.
Analysis permits of another solution. The attempt at explanation, which so surprises me 
if I am to attribute it to the dream-work, is not original, but is copied from the 
neurosis of one of my patients. I have already spoken in another chapter of a highly 
cultured and  kindly man who began, shortly after the death of his parents, to accuse 
himself of murderous tendencies, and who was distressed by the precautionary measures 
which he had to take to secure himself against these tendencies. His was a case of severe 
obsessional ideas with full insight. To begin with, it was painful to him to walk through 
the streets, as he was obsessed by the necessity of accounting for all the persons he 
met; he had to know whit her they had disappeared; if one of them suddenly eluded his 
pursuing glance, he was left with a feeling of distress and the idea that he might 
possibly have made away with the man. Behind this obsessive idea was concealed, among 
other things, a Cain-phantasy, for "alt men are brothers." Owing to the impossibility of 
accomplishing this task, he gave up going for walks, and spent his life imprisoned within 
his four walls. But reports of murders which had been committed in the world outside were 
constantly reaching his room by way of the newspapers, and his conscience tormented him 
with the doubt that he might be the murderer for whom the police were looking. The 
certainty that he had not left the house for weeks protected him for a time against these 
accusations, until one day there dawned upon him the possibility that he might have left 
his house while in an unconscious state, and might* thus-have committed murder without 
knowing anything about it. From that time onwards he locked his front door, and gave the 
key to his old housekeeper, strictly forbidding her to give it into his hands, even if he 
demanded it.
This, then, is the origin of the attempted explanation that I may have changed carriages 
while in an unconscious state; it has been taken into the dream ready-made, from the 
material of the dream-thoughts, and is evidently intended to identify me with the person 
of my patient. My memory of this patient was awakened by natural association. My last 
night journey had been made a few weeks earlier in his company. He was cured, and we were 
going into the country together to his relatives who, had sent for me; as we had a 
compartment to ourselves, we left all the windows open through out the night, and for as 
long as I remained awake we had a most interesting conversation. I knew that hostile 
impulses towards his father in childhood, in a sexual connection, had been at the root of 
his illness. By identifying myself with him, I wanted to make an analogous confession to 
myself. The second scene of the dream really resolves itself into a wanton phantasy to 
the effect that my two elderly travelling companions had acted so uncivilly towards me 
because my arrival on the scene had prevented them from exchanging kisses and embraces 
during the night, as they had intended. This phantasy, however, goes back to an early 
incident of my childhood when, probably impelled by sexual curiosity, I had intruded into 
my parents' bedroom, and was driven thence by my father's emphatic command.
I think it would be superfluous to multiply such examples. They would all confirm what we 
have learned from those already cited: namely, that an act of judgment in a dream is 
merely the repetition of an original act of judgment in the dream-thoughts. In most cases 
it is an unsuitable repetition, fitted into an inappropriate context; occasionally, 
however, as in our last example, it is so artfully applied that it may almost give one 
the impression of independent intellectual activity in the dream. At this point we might 
turn our attention to that psychic activity which, though it does not appear to 
co-operate constantly in the formation of dreams, yet endeavours to fuse the 
dream-elements of different origin into a flaw less and significant whole. We consider it 
necessary, however, first of all to consider the expressions of affect which appear in 
dreams, and to compare these with the affects which analysis discovers in the 
dream-thoughts.
H. The Affects in Dreams
A shrewd remark of Strieker's called our attention to the fact that the expressions of 
affects in dreams cannot be disposed of in the contemptuous fashion in which we are wont 
to shake off the dream-content after we have waked. "If I am afraid of robbers in my 
dreams, the robbers, to be sure, are imaginary,; but the fear of them is real"; and the 
same thing is true if I rejoice in my dream. According to the testimony of our feelings, 
an affect experienced in a dream is in no way inferior to one of like intensity 
experienced in waking life, and the dream presses its claim to be accepted as part of our 
real psychic experiences, by virtue of its affective rather than its ideational content. 
In the waking state, we do not put the one before the other, since we do not know how to 
evaluate an affect psychically except in connection with an ideational content. If an 
affect and an idea are ill-matched as regards their nature or their intensity, our waking 
judgment becomes confused. 
The fact that in dreams the ideational content does not always produce the affective 
result which in our waking thoughts we should expect as its necessary consequence has 
always: been a cause of astonishment; Strumpell declared that; ideas in dreams are 
stripped- of their psychic values. But there is no lack of instances in which the reverse 
is true; when an intensive manifestation of affect appears in "a content which seems-to 
offer no occasion for it; In my dream I may be in a horrible, dangerous, or disgusting 
situation, and yet I may feel no fear or aversion; on the other hand, I am sometimes 
terrified by harmless things, and sometimes delighted by childish things.
This enigma disappeared more suddenly and more completely than perhaps any other dream 
problem if we pass from the manifest to the latent content. We shall then no longer have 
to explain it, for it will no longer exist. Analysis tells us that the ideational 
contents have undergone displacements and substitutions; while the affects have remained 
unchanged: No wonder, then, that the ideational content which has been altered by 
dream-distortion no longer fits the affect which has remained intact; and no cause for 
wonder when analysis has put the correct content into its original place.¹
In a-psychic complex which has been subjected to the influence of the resisting censor 
ship, the affects are the unyielding constituent, which alone can guide us to the correct 
completion. This state of affairs is revealed in the psychoneuroses even more distinctly 
than in dreams. Here the affect is always in the right, at least as regards its quality; 
its intensity may, of course, be increased by displacement of the neurotic attention. 
When the hysterical patient wonders that he should be so afraid of a trifle, or when the 
sufferer from obsessions is astonished that he should reproach himself so bitterly for a 
mere nothing, they are both in
¹If I am not greatly mistaken, the first dream which I was able to elicit from my 
grandson (aged 20 months) points to the fact that the dream-work had succeeded in 
transforming its material into a wish fulfilment, while the affect which belonged to it 
remained. unchanged even in the sleeping state. The. night before its father was to 
return to the front the child cried out, sobbing violently: "Papa, Papa—Baby.", That 
may mean: Let Papa and Baby still be, together;, while the weeping takes cognizance of 
the imminent departure. The child was at the time very well able to express the concept 
of separation. Fort (=away, replaced, by a peculiarly accented, long drawn out oook) had 
been his first word, and for many, months before this first dream he had played at away 
with all his toys; which went back to his early self-conquest in allowing his mother to 
go away.

error, inasmuch as they regard the conceptual content—the trifle, the mere nothing—as 
the essential thing, 'arid they1defend themselves in vain, because they make this 
conceptual content the starting-point of their thought-work: Psycho-analysis, however, 
puts them1 oh the fight path, inasmuch as it recognizes that, on the contrary, it is the 
affect that is justified, and looks for the concept which pertains to it, and which has 
been repressed by a substitution. All that we need assume is that the liberation of 
affect and the conceptual content do not constitute the indissoluble organic unity as 
which we are wont to regard them, but that the two parts may be welded together, so that 
analysis will separate them. Dream-interpretation shows that this is actually the; case.
I will first of all give ah example in which analysis explains the apparent absence of 
affect in a conceptual content which ought to compel a liberation of affect.
I
The dreamer sees three lions in a desert, one of which is laughing, but she is not afraid 
of them, Then, however, she must have fled from them, for she is trying to climb a tree 
But she finds that her cousin, the French teacher, is already up in the tree, etc. 
The analysis yields the following material: The indifferent occasion of the dream was a 
sentence in the dreamer's English exercise: "The lion's greatest adornment is his mane?' 
Her father used to wear a beard which encircled his face like a mane. The name of her 
English teacher is Miss Lyons. An acquaintance of hers sent her the ballads of Loewe 
(Loewe=lion): These, then, are the three lions; why should she be afraid of them? She has 
read a story in which a negro Who has incited his fellows to revolt is hunted With 
bloodhounds, and climbs a tree to save himself. Then follow fragmentary recollections in 
the merriest mood, such as the following directions for catching lions (from Die 
Fliegende Blatter): "Take a desert and put it through a sieve; the lions will be left 
behind." Also a very amusing, but not very proper anecdote about an official who is asked 
why he does not take greater pains to win the favour of his chief\ and who replies that 
he has been trying to creep into favour, but that his immediate superior was already up 
there. The whole matter becomes intelligible as soon as one: learns that  on the 
dream-day the lady had received a visit from her husband's superior. He Was very polite 
to her, and kissed her hand, and she was not at all afraid of him, although he is a big 
bug (Grosses Tier==big animal) and plays the part- of a social lion in the capital of-her 
country. This lion is, therefore, like the lion in A Midsummer Night's Dream, who is 
unmasked as Snug the joiner; and of such stuff ate all the dream-lions of which one is 
not afraid.
II
As my second example, I will cite the dream of the girl who saw her sister’s little son 
lying as a corpse in his coffin, but who, it may be added, was conscious of no pain or 
sorrow. Why she was unmoved we know from the analysis. The dream only disguised her wish 
to see once more the man she loved; the affect had to be attuned to the wish, and not to 
its disguisement. There was thus no occasion for sorrow.
In a number of dreams the affect does, at least remain connected with the conceptual 
content which has replaced the content really belonging to it. In others, the dissolution 
of the complex is carried farther. The affect is entirely separated from the idea 
belonging to it, and finds itself accommodated elsewhere in the dream, where it fits into 
the new arrangement of the dream-elements. We have seen that the same thing happens to 
acts of judgement in dreams. If an important inference occurs in the dream-thoughts, 
there is one in the dream also; but the inference in the dream may be displaced to 
entirely different material; Not infrequently this displacement is effected in accordance 
with the principle of antithesis. I will illustrate the latter possibility by the 
following dream, which I have subjected to the most exhaustive analysis.
III
A castle by the sea; afterwards it lies not directly on the coast, but on a narrow canal 
leading to the sea. A certain Herr P is the governor of the castle. I stand with him in a 
large salon with three windows, in front of which rise the projections of a wall, like 
battlements of a fortress. I belong to the garrison, perhaps as a volunteer naval 
officer. We fear the arrival of enemy warships, for we are in a state of war. Herr P 
intends to leave the castle; he gives me instructions as to what must be done if what we 
fear should come to pass. His sick wife and his children are in the threatened castle. As 
soon as the bombardment be gins, the large hall is to be cleared. He breathes heavily, 
and tries to get away; I detain him, Und ask him how I am to send him news in case of 
need. He says something further, and immediately afterwards he sinks to the floor dead. I 
have probably taxed him unnecessarily with my questions. After his death, which makes no 
further impression upon me, I consider whether the widow is to remain in the castle, 
whether I should give notice of the death to the higher command, whether I should take 
over the control of the castle as the next in command. I now stand at the window, and 
scrutinize the ships as they pass by; they are cargo steamers, arid they rush by over the 
dark water; several with more than one funnel, others with bulging decks (these are very 
like the railway stations in the preliminary dream, which has not been related). Then my 
brother is standing beside me, and we both look out of the window, on to the canal. At 
the sight of one ship we are alarmed, and call out: "Here comes the warship!" It turns 
out, however, that they are only the ships which I have already seen, returning. Now 
comes a small ship, comically truncated, so that it ends amidships; on the deck one sees 
curious things like cups or little boxes. We call out as with one voice: "That is the 
breakfast ship"
The rapid motion of the ships, the deep blue of the water, the brown smoke of the funnels 
—all these together produce an intense and gloomy impression.
The localities in this dream are compiled from several journeys to the Adriatic 
(Mira-mare, Duino, Venice, Aquileia). A short but enjoyable Easter trip to Aquileia with 
my brother, a few weeks before the dream, was still fresh in my memory; also the naval 
war between America and Spain, and, associated with this my anxiety as to the fate of my 
relatives in America, play a part in the dreams Manifestations of affect appear at two 
places in this dream. In one place an affect that would be expected is lacking: it 
expressly emphasized that the death of the governor makes no impression upon me; at 
another point, when I see the warships, I am frightened, and experience all the 
sensations of fright in my sleep. The distribution of affects in this well-constructed 
dream has been effected in such a way that any obvious, contradiction is avoided. For 
there is no reason why I should be frightened at the governor's death, and it is fitting 
that, as the commander of the castle, I should be alarmed by the sight of the warship. 
Now analysis shows that Herr P is nothing but a substitute for my own ego (in the dream I 
am his substitute).
I am the governor who suddenly dies. The dream-thoughts deal with the future of my family 
after my premature death. No other disagreeable thought is to be found among the 
dream-thoughts. The alarm which goes with the sight of the warship must be transferred 
from it to this disagreeable thought. Inversely, the analysis shows that the region of 
the dream-thoughts from which the warship comes is laden with most cheerful 
reminiscences. In Venice, a year before the dream, one magically beautiful day, we stood 
at the windows of our room on the Riva Schiavoni and looked out over the blue lagoon, on 
which there was more traffic to be seen than usual. Some English ships were expected; 
they were to be given a festive reception; and suddenly my wife cried, happy as a child: 
"Here comes the English warship!" In the dream I am frightened by the very same words; 
once more we see that speeches in dreams have their origin in speeches in real life. I 
shall presently show that even the element English in this speech has not been lost for 
the dream-work. Here, then, between the dream-thoughts and the dream-content, I turn joy 
into fright, and I need only point to the fact that by means of this transformation I 
give expression to part of the latent dream-content. The example shows, however, that the 
dream-work is at liberty to detach the occasion of an affect from its connections in the 
dream-thoughts, and to insert it at any other place it chooses in the dream content. 
I will take the opportunity which is here, incidentally offered of subjecting to a closer 
analysis the breakfast ship, whose appearance in the dream so absurdly concludes a 
situation that has been rationally adhered to. If I look more closely at this 
dream-object, I am impressed after the event by the fact that it was black, and that by 
reason of its truncation at its widest beam it achieved, at the truncated end, a 
considerable resemblance to an object which had aroused our interest in the museums of 
the Etruscan cities. This object was a rectangular cup of black clay, with two handles, 
upon which stood things like coffee-cups or tea-cups, very similar to our modern service 
for the breakfast table. Upon inquiry we learned that this was the toilet set of an 
Etruscan lady, with little boxes for rouge and pow der; and we told one another jestingly 
that it would not be a bad idea to take a thing like that home to the lady of the house. 
The dream object, therefore, signifies a black toilet (toilette=dress), or mourning, and 
refers directly to a death. The other end of the dream-object reminds us of the boat 
(German, Nachen, from the Greek root, νεχυϛ, as a philological friend informs me), 
upon which corpses were laid in prehistoric times, and were left to be buried by the sea. 
This is associated with the return of the ships in the dream.
"Silently on his rescued boat the old man drifts into harbour."
It is the return voyage after the shipwreck (German: Schiff-bruch = ship-breaking); the 
breakfast ship looks as though it were broken off amidships. But whence comes the name 
breakfast ship? This is where English comes in, which we have left over from the 
warships. Breakfast, a breaking of the fast. Breaking again belongs to shipwreck 
(Schiff-bruch), and fasting is associated with the black (mourning).
But the only thing about this breakfast ship which has been newly created by the dream is 
its name: The thing existed4n reality, and re calls to me one of the merriest moments of 
my last journey. As we distrusted the fare in Aquileia, we took some food with us from 
Goerz, and bought a bottle of the excellent Istrian wine in Aquileia; and while the 
little mail steamer slowly travelled through the canale delle Mee and into the lonely 
expanse of lagoon in the direction of Grado, we had breakfast on deck in the highest 
spirits—we were the only passengers—and it tasted to us as few break fasts have ever 
tasted. This, then, was the breakfast ship, and it is behind this very recollection of 
the gayest joie de vivre that the dream hides the saddest thoughts of an un known and 
mysterious future.
The detachment of affects from the groups of ideas which have occasioned their liberation 
is the most striking thing that happens to them in dream-formation, but it is neither the 
only nor even the most essential change which they undergo on the way from the 
dream-thoughts to the manifest dream. If the affects in the dream-thoughts are compared 
with those in the dream, one thing at once becomes clear: Wherever there is an affect in 
the dream, it is to be found also in the dream thoughts; the converse, however, is not 
true. In general, a dream is less rich in affects than the psychic material from which it 
is elaborated. When I have reconstructed the dream thoughts, I see that the most intense 
psychic impulses are constantly striving in them for self-assertion, usually in conflict 
with others which are sharply opposed to them. Now, if I turn back to the dream, I often 
find it colour less and devoid of any very intensive affective tone. Not only the 
content, but also the affective tone of my thoughts is often reduced by the dream-work to 
the level of the indifferent. I might say that a suppression of the affects has been 
accomplished by the dream-work. Take, for example, the dream of the botanical monograph. 
It corresponds to a passionate plea for my freedom to act as I am acting, to arrange my 
life as seems right to me, and to me alone. The dream which results from this sounds 
indifferent; I have written a monograph; it is lying before me; it is provided with 
coloured plates, and dried plants are to be found in each copy. It is like the peace of a 
deserted battlefield; no trace is left of the tumult of battle.
But things may turn out quite differently; vivid expressions of affect may enter into the 
dream itself; but we will first of all consider the unquestioned fact that so many dreams 
ap pear indifferent, whereas it is never possible to go deeply into the dream-thoughts 
without deep emotion.
The complete theoretical explanation of this suppression of affects during the dream-work 
cannot be given here; it would require a most careful investigation, of the theory of the 
affects and of the mechanism of repression. Here I can put forward only two suggestions. 
I am forced—for other reasons—to conceive the liberation of affects as a centrifugal 
process directed towards the interior of the body, analogous to the processes of motor 
and secretory innervation. Just as in the sleeping state the emission of motor impulses 
towards the outer world seems to be suspended, so the centrifugal awakening of affects by 
unconscious thinking during sleep may be rendered more difficult. The affective impulses 
which occur during the course of the dream-thoughts may thus in themselves be feeble, so 
that those that find their way into the dream are no stronger. According to this line of 
thought, the suppression of the affects would not be a consequence of the dream-work at 
all, but a consequence of the state of sleep. This may be so, but it can not possibly be 
ail the truth. We must remember that all the more complex dreams have revealed themselves 
as the result of a compromise between conflicting psychic forces. On the one hand, the 
wish-forming thoughts have to oppose the contradiction of a censorship; on the other 
hand, as we have often seen, even in unconscious thinking, every train of thought is 
harnessed to its contradictory counterpart; Since all these trains of thought are capable 
of arousing affects, we shall, broadly speaking, hardly go astray if we conceive the 
suppression of affects as the result of the inhibition which the contrasts impose upon 
one another, and the censorship upon the urges which it has suppressed. The inhibition of 
affects would accordingly be the second consequence of the dream-censorship, just as 
dream-distortion was the first consequence.
I will here insert an example of a. dream in which the indifferent emotional tone of the 
dream-content may be explained by the antagonism of the dream-thoughts. I must relate the 
following short dream, which every reader will read with disgust.
IV
Rising ground, and on it something like an open-air latrine; a very long bench, at the 
end of which is a wide aperture. The whole of the back edge is thickly covered with 
little heaps of excrement of all sizes and degrees of fresh ness. A thicket behind the 
bench. I urinate upon the bench; a long stream of urine rinses everything clean, the 
patches of excrement come off easily and fall into the opening. Nevertheless, it seems as 
though something remained at the end.
Why did I experience no disgust in this dream?
Because, as the analysis shows, the most pleasant and gratifying thoughts have co 
operated in the formation of this dream. Upon analysing it, I immediately think of the 
Augean stables which were cleansed by Hercules. I am this Hercules. The rising ground and 
the thicket belong to Aussee, where my children are now staying. I have discovered the 
infantile aetiology of the neuroses, and have thus guarded my own children from falling 
ill. The bench (omitting the aperture, of course) is the faithful copy of a piece of 
furniture of which an affectionate female patient has made me a present. This reminds me 
how my patients honour me. Even the museum of human excrement is susceptible of a 
gratifying interpretation. How ever much it disgusts me, it is a souvenir of the 
beautiful land of Italy, where in the small cities, as everyone knows, the privies are 
not equipped in any other way. The stream of urine that washes everything clean is an 
unmistakable allusion to greatness. It is in this manner that Gulliver extinguishes the 
great fire in Lilliput;; to be sure, he thereby incurs the displeasure of the tiniest of 
queens. In this way, too, Gargantua, the superman of Master Rabelais, takes vengeance 
upon the Parisians, straddling Notre-Dame and training his stream of urine upon the city. 
Only yesterday I was turning over the leaves of Garnier's illustrations to Rabelais 
before I went to bed. And, strangely enough, here is another proof that I am the 
superman! The platform of Notre-Dame was my favourite nook in Paris; every free afternoon 
I used to go up into the towers of the cathedral and there clamber about be tween the 
monsters and gargoyles. The circumstance that all the excrement vanishes so rapidly 
before the stream of urine corresponds to the motto: Affiavit et dissipati sunt, which I 
shall some day make the title of a chapter on the therapeutics of hysteria.
And now as to the affective occasion of the dream. It had been a hot summer afternoon; in 
the evening, I had given my lecture on the connection between hysteria and the 
perversions, and everything which I had to say dis pleased me thoroughly, and seemed 
utterly valueless. I was tired; I took not the least pleasure in my difficult work, and 
longed to get away from this rummaging in human filth; first to see my children, and then 
to revisit the beauties of Italy. In this mood I went from the lecture-hall to a cafe to 
get some little refreshment in the open air, for my appetite had forsaken me. But a 
member of my audience went with me; he begged for permission tb sit with me while I drank 
my coffee and gulped down my roll, and began to say flattering things to me. He told me 
how much he had learned from me, that he now saw everything through different eyes, that 
I had cleansed the Augean stables of error and prejudice, which encumbered the theory of 
the neuroses^-in short, that I was a very great man. My mood was ill-suited to his hymn 
of praise; I struggled with my disgust, and went home earlier in order to get rid of him; 
and before I went to sleep I turned over the leaves of Rabelais, and read a short story 
by G. F. Meyer entitled Die Leiden eines Knaben (The Sorrows of a Boy).
The dream had originated from this; material, and Meyer-s novel had supplied the 
recollections of scenes of childhood.¹ The day's mood of annoyance and disgust is 
continued in the dream, inasmuch as it is permitted to furnish nearly all the material 
for the dream-con
¹Cf. the dream about Count Thun, last scene.
tent. But during the night the opposite mood of. vigorous, even immoderate self-assertion 
awakened and dissipated the earlier mood. The dream had to assume such a form as would 
accommodate both the expressions of self-depreciation and exaggerated self-glorification 
in the same material. This compromise-formation resulted in an ambiguous dream-content, 
but, owing to the mutual inhibition of the opposites, in an indifferent emotional tone.
According to the theory of wish-fulfilment, this dream would not have been possible had 
not the opposed, and indeed suppressed, yet pleasure-emphasized megalomaniac train pf 
thought been added to the thoughts of disgust For nothing painful is intended to be 
represented in dreams; the painful elements of our daily thoughts are able to force their 
way into our dreams only if at the same time they are able to disguise a wish-fulfilment.
The dream-work is able to dispose of the affects of the dream-thoughts.in yet another way 
than by admitting them or reducing them to zero. It can transform them into their 
opposites. We are acquainted with the rule that for the purposes of interpretation every, 
element of the dream may represent its opposite, as well as itself. One can never tell 
beforehand which is to be posited; only the context can decide this point; A suspicion of 
this state of affairs has- evidently found its way into; the popular consciousness;:the 
dream-books, in their interpretations, often proceed according to the principle of 
contraries. This transformation into the contrary is made possible by the intimate 
associative ties which in our thoughts connect the idea of a thing with that of its 
opposite. Like every other displacement, this serves the purposes of the censorship, but 
it is often the work of wish-fulfilment, for wish-fulfilment consists in nothing more 
than the substitution of an unwelcome thing by its opposite. Just as concrete images may 
be transformed into their contraries in our dreams, so also may the affects of the 
dream-thoughts, and it is probable that this inversion of affects is usually brought 
about by the dream-censorship. The suppression and inversion of affects is useful even in 
social life, as is shown by the familiar analogy of the dream-censorship and above all; 
hypocrisy. If I am conversing with a person to whom I must show consideration while I 
should like to address him as ah enemy, it is almost more important that I should conceal 
the expression of my affect from him than that I should modify the verbal expression of 
my thoughts. If I address him in courteous terms, but accompany them by looks or gestures 
of hatred and disdain, the effect which I produce upon him is not very different from 
what it would have been had I cast my unmitigated contempt into his face. Above all, 
then, the censorship bids me suppress my affects, and if I am a master of the art of 
dissimulation I can hypocritically display the opposite affect smiling where I should 
like to be angry, and pretending affection where I should like to destroy.
We have already had an excellent example of such an inversion of affect in the service of 
the dream-censorship. In the dream of my uncle's beard I feel great affection for my 
friend R, while (and because) the dream-thoughts berate him as a simpleton. From this 
example of the inversion of affects we derived our first proof of the existence, of the 
censor ship. Even here it.is not necessary to assume that the dream-work creates a 
counter-affect of this kind that is altogether new; it usually finds it lying ready in 
the material of the dream-thoughts, and merely intensifies it with the psychic force of 
the defences-motives until it is able to predominate in the dream-formation. In the dream 
of my uncle, the affection ate counter-affect probably has its origin in an infantile 
source (as the continuation of the dream would suggest), for owing to the peculiar nature 
of my earliest childhood experiences the relation of uncle and nephew has become the 
source of all my friendships and hatreds (cf. analysis on pp. 304-5above).
An excellent example of such a reversal of affect is found in a dream recorded by 
Ferenczi.¹ "An elderly gentleman was awakened at night by his wife, who was frightened 
because he laughed so loudly and uncontrollably in his sleep. The man afterwards related 
that he had had the following dream: I lay in my bed, a gentleman known to me came in, I 
wanted to turn on the light, but I could not; I attempted to do so repeatedy, but in 
vain. Thereupon my wife got out of bed, in order to help me, but she, too, was unable to 
manage it; being ashamed of her neglige in the presence of the gentleman, she finally 
gave it up and went back to her bed; all this was so comical that I had to laugh 
terribly. My wife said: What are you laughing at, what are you laughing at?' but I 
continued to laugh until I woke. The following day the man was extremely depressed; and 
suffered from headache: ‘From too much laughter, which shook me up,’ he thought.
"Analytically considered; the dream looks less comical. In the latent dream thoughts the 
gentleman known to him who came into the room is the image of death as the 'great 
unknown, which was awakened in his mind on the previous day. The old gentleman, who 
suffers from arteriosclerosis, had good reason to think of death on the day before the 
dream. The uncontrollable laughter takes the place of weeping and sobbing at the idea 
that he has to die. It is the light of life that he is no longer able to turn on. This 
mournful thought may have as sociated itself with a failure to effect sexual intercourse, 
which he had attempted shortly before this, and in which the assistance of his wife en 
fiiglige was of no avail; he realized that he was already on the decline. The dream work 
knew how to transform the sad idea of impotence and death into a comic scene, and the 
sobbing into laughter." 
There is one class of dreams which has a special claim to be called hypocritical, and 
which severely tests the theory of wish-fulfilment. My attention was called to them when 
Frau Dr. M. Hilferding proposed for discussion by the Psychoanalytic Society of Vienna a 
dream recorded by Rosegger, which is here reprinted: 
In Waldheimat, vol. xi, Rosegger writes as follows in his story, Fremd gemacht (p. 303):
"I usually enjoy healthful sleep, yet I have gone without repose on many a night; in 
addition to my modest existence as a student and literary man, I have for long years 
dragged out the shadow of a veritable tailor's life—like a ghost from which I could not 
become divorced. 
"It is not true that I have occupied myself very often or very intensely with thoughts of 
my past during the day. A stormer of heaven and earth who has escaped from the hide of 
the Philistine has other things to think about. And as a gay young fellow, I hardly gave 
a thought to my nocturnal dreams; only later, when I had formed the habit of thinking 
about everything, or when the Philistine within me began to assert itself a little, did 
it strike me that—when I dreamed at all—I was always a journeyman tailor, and that in 
that capacity I had already worked in my master's shop for a long time without any pay. 
As I sat there beside him, and sewed and pressed, I was perfectly well aware that I no 
longer belonged there and that as a burgess of the town I had other things to attend to; 
but I was always on a holiday, or away in the country, and so I sat beside my master and 
helped him. I often felt far from comfortable, about it, and regretted the waste of time 
which I might have employed for better and more useful purposes. If anything was not 
quite correct in measure and cut I had to put up with a scolding from my mas ter. Of 
wages there*was never a question. Often, as I sat with bent back in the dark workshop, I 
decided to give notice and make myself scarce. Once I actually did so, but the master 
took no notice of me, and next time I was sitting beside him again and sewing.
"How happy I was when I woke up after such weary hours! And I then resolved that, if this 
intrusive dream should ever occur again, I would energetically throw it off, and would 
cry aloud: 'It is only a delusion, I am lying in bed, and I want to sleep' . . . And the 
next night I would be sitting in the tailor's shop again.
"So it went on for years, with dismal regularity. Once when the master and I were working 
at Alpelhofer's, at the house of the peasant with whom I began my apprenticeship, it 
happened that my master was particularly dissatisfied with my work. 'I should like to 
know where in the world your thoughts are?' he cried, and looked at me sullenly. I 
thought the most sensible thing to do would be to get up and explain to the master that I 
was working with him only as a favour, and then take my leave. But I did not do this. I 
even submitted when the master engaged an apprentice, and ordered me to make room for him 
on the bench. I moved into the corner, and kept on sewing. On the same day another 
journeyman was engaged; a bigoted fellow; he was the Bohemian who had worked for us 
nineteen years earlier, and then had fallen into the lake on his way home from the 
public-house. When he tried to sit down there was no ^room-for him. I looked at the 
master inquiringly, and he said to me: 'You have no talent for tailoring; you may go; 
you're a stranger henceforth.' My fright on that occasion was so overpowering that I 
woke. 
"The grey of morning glimmered' through the clear windows of my familiar home. Objets 
d'art surrounded me; in the tasteful bookcase stood the eternal Homer, the gigantic 
Dante, the incomparable Shakespeare, the glorious Goethe—all radiant and immortal, From 
the adjoining room resounded the clear little voices of the children, who were waking up 
and prattling to their mother. I felt as though I had rediscovered that idyllically 
sweet, peaceful, poetical and spiritualized life in which I have so often and so deeply 
been conscious of contemplative human happiness. And yet I was vexed that I had not given 
my master notice first, but had been dismissed by him.,
"And how remarkable this seems to me: since that night, when my master 'made a stranger' 
of me,. I have enjoyed restful sleep; I no longer dream of my tailoring-days-, which now 
he in the remote past; which in their unpretentious simplicity were really so cheerful, 
but which, none the less, have cast a long shadow over the later years of my life."
In this series of dreams of a poet who, in his younger years, had been a journeyman 
tailor, it is hard to recognize the domination of the wish-fulfilment. AH the delightful 
things occurred in his waking life, while the dream seemed to drag along with it the 
ghost-like shadow of an unhappy existence which had long been forgotten. Dreams of my own 
of a similar character enable me to give some ex planation of such dreams. As a young 
doctor, I worked for a long time in the Chemical Institute without being able 
to-accomplish anything in that exacting science, so that in the waking state I never 
think about this unfruitful and actually somewhat humiliating period of my student days. 
On the other hand, I have a recurring dream to the effect that I am working in the 
laboratory, making analyses, and experiments, and so forth; these dreams, like the 
examination-dreams, are disagreeable, and they are never very distinct. During the 
analysis of one of these dreams my attention was directed to the word analysis, which 
gave me the key to an understanding of them. Since then I have become an analyst. I make 
analyses which are greatly praised psycho-analyses, of course. Now I understand: when I 
feel proud of these analyses in my waking life, and feel inclined to boast of my 
achievements, my dreams hold up to me at night those other, unsuccessful analyses, of 
which I have no reason to be proud; they are the punitive dreams of the upstart, like 
those of the journeyman tailor who became a celebrated poet. But how is it possible for a 
dream to place itself at the service of self-criticism in its conflict with parvenu 
pride, and to take as its content a rational warning instead of a prohibited 
wish-fulfilment? I have already hinted that the answer to this question presents many 
difficulties. We may conclude that the foundation of the dream consisted at first of an 
arrogant phantasy of ambition; but that in its stead only its suppression and abasement 
has reached the dream-content. One must remember that there are masochistic tendencies in 
mental life to which such an in version might be attributed. I see no objection to 
regarding such dreams as punishment dreams, as distinguished from Wish-fulfilling dreams. 
I should not see in this any limitation of the theory of dreams hitherto as presented, 
but merely a verbal concession to the point of view to which the convergence of 
contraries seems strange. But a more thorough investigation of individual dreams of this 
class allows us to recognize yet another element. In an in distinct, subordinate portion 
of one of my laboratory dreams, I was just at the age which placed me in the most gloomy 
and most unsuccessful year of my professional career; I still had no position, and no 
idea how I was going to support myself when suddenly found that I had the choice of 
several women Whom I might marry! I was therefore, young again and, what is more, she was 
young again the woman who has shared with me all these difficult years. In this way, one 
of the Wishes which constantly gnaws at the heart of the age ing man was revealed as the 
unconscious dream-instigator. The conflict raging in other psychic strata between vanity 
and self-criticism had certainly determined the dream-content, but the more deeply-rooted 
wish for youth had alone made it possible as a dream. One often says to oneself even in 
the waking state: "Tb be sure, things are going well with you today, and once you found 
life very hard; but, after all, life was sweet in those days, when you were still so 
young."¹
Another group of dreams, which I have often myself experienced, and which I have 
recognized to be hypocritical, have as their content a reconciliation with persons with 
whom one has long ceased to have friendly relations; The analysis constantly discovers an 
occasion which might well induce me to cast aside the last remnants of consideration for 
these former friends, and to treat them as strangers or enemies; But the dream chooses 
to' depict the contrary relation.
In considering dreams recorded by a novelist or poet, we may often enough assume that he 
has excluded from the record those details which he felt to be disturbing and regarded as 
unessential. His dreams thus set us a problem Which could be readily solved if we had an 
exact reproduction of the dream-content.
¹Ever since psycho-analysis has dissected the personality into an ^ego and a super-ego 
(Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, p. 664 below), it has been easy to 
recognize in these punishment-dreams wish fulfilments of the super-ego.
O. Rank has called my attention to the fact that in Grimm's fairy-tale of-the valiant 
little tailor^ or Seven at One Stroke, there is related a very similar dream of an 
upstart; The tailor, who has become a hero, and has married the king's daughter, dreams 
one night while lying beside the princess, his Wife, about his trade; having become 
suspicious, on the following night she places armed guards where they can listen to What 
is said by the dreamer, and arrest him. But the little tailor is warned, and is able to 
correct his dream.
The complicated processes of removal, diminution, and inversion by which the affects of 
the dream-thoughts finally become the affects of the dream may be very well surveyed in 
suit able syntheses of completely analysed dreams. I Shall here discuss a few examples of 
affective manifestations in dreams which will I think, prove this conclusively in some of 
the cases cited;
V
In the dream about the odd task which the elder Brucke sets me—that of preparing my own 
pelvis—-I am aware in the dream itself of not feeling appropriate horror. Now this is a 
wish-fulfilment in more senses, than one. The preparation signifies the self-analyses 
which I perform, as it were, by publishing my book on dreams, which I actually found so 
painful that I postponed the. printing of the completed manuscript for more than a year. 
The wish now arises that I may disregard this feeling of aversion, and -for that reason I 
feel no horror (Graueti, which also means to grow-grey) in the dream. I should much like 
to escape Grauen in the other sense too, for I am already growing quite grey, and the 
grey in my hair warns me to; delay no longer. For we know that at the end of the dream 
this thought secures representation: "I shall have to leave my children to reach the goal 
of their difficult journey without my help."
In the two dreams that transfer the expression of satisfaction to the moments immediately 
after waking, this satisfaction is in the one ease motivated by the expectation that I am 
now going to learn what is meant by I have already dreamed of this, and refers in reality 
to the birth of my first child, and in the other case it is motivated by the; conviction 
that "that which has been announced by a premonitory sign" is now going to happen, and 
the satisfaction is that which I felt on the arrival of my second son. Here the same 
affects that dominated in the dream-thoughts have remained in the dream, but the process 
is probably hot quite so simple as this in any dream. If the two analyses are examined a 
little more closely it will be seen that this satisfaction, Which does not succumb to 
the: censorship, receives reinforcement from a source which must fear the censorship, and 
whose affect would certainly have aroused opposition if it had not screened itself by a 
similar and readily admitted affect of satisfaction from the permitted source, and had, 
so to speak, sneaked in behind it. I am unfortunately unable to show this in the case of 
the actual dream, but an example from another situation will make my meaning 
intelligible. I will put the following case: Let there be a person near me whom I hate so 
strongly that I have a lively impulse to rejoice should anything happen to him. But the 
moral side of my nature does not give way to this impulse; I do not dare to express this 
sinister wish, and when something does happen to him which he does not deserve I suppress 
my satisfaction; and force myself to thoughts and ex pressions of regrets Everyone Will 
at some time have found himself in such a position. But now let it happen that the hated 
person/ through some transgression of his own, draws upon himself a Well-deserved 
calamity; I shall now be allowed to give free rein to my satisfaction at his being 
visited by a just punishment; and I shall be expressing an opinion which coincides with 
that of other impartial persons. But I observe that my satisfaction proves to be more 
Intense than that of others, for it has received reinforcement from another source—from 
my hatred, which was hitherto prevented by the inner censorship from furnishing the 
affect, but which, under the altered circumstances, is no longer prevented from doing so. 
This case generally occurs in social life when antipathetic persons or the adherents of 
an unpopular minority have been guilty of some offence. Their punishment is then usually 
commensurate not with their guilt, but With their guilt plus the ill will against them 
that has hitherto not been put into effect; Those who punish them doubtless commit an 
injustice, but they are prevented from becoming aware of it by the satisfaction arising 
from the release within themselves of a suppression of long standing. In such cases the 
quality of' the affect is justified, but not its degree; and the self-criticism that has 
been appeased in respect of the first point is only too ready to neglect to scrutinize 
the second point; Once you-have opened the doors, more people enter than it was your 
original intention to admit.
A striking feature of the neurotic character, namely, that in it causes capable of 
evoking affect produce results which are qualitatively justified but quantitatively 
excessive, is to be explained on these lines, in so far as.it admits of a psychological 
explanation at all. But the excess of affect proceeds from unconscious and hitherto 
suppressed affective sources which are able to establish an associative connection with 
the actual occasion, and for whose liberation of affect the unprotested and permitted 
source of affects opens up the desired path. Our attention is thus called to the fact 
that the relation of mutual inhibition must not be regarded as the only relation 
obtaining between the suppressed and the suppressing psychic institution. The cases in 
which ^the two institutions bring about a pathological result by co-operation. and mutual 
reinforcement deserve just as much, attention; These hints regarding the psychic 
mechanism will contribute to-our understanding of the expressions of affects in dreams. A 
gratification which makes its appearance in a dream, and which, of course, may readily be 
found in its proper place in the dream-thoughts, may not always be fully explained by 
means of this reference. As a rule, it is necessary to search for a second source in the 
dream-thoughts, upon which the pressure of the censorship rests, and which, under this 
pressure, would have yielded not gratification but the contrary effect, had it not been 
enabled by the presence of the first dream-source to free its gratification-affect from 
repression, and. reinforce the gratification springing, from the other source. Hence 
affects which appear in dreams appear to be formed by the confluence of several 
tributaries, and are over-determined in respect of the material of the dream-thoughts; 
Sources of affect which are able to furnish the same affect combine in the dream-work in 
order to produce it.¹
Some insight into these involved relations is gained from the analysis of the admirable 
dream in which Won vixit constitutes the central point (cf. p. 304). In this dream 
expressions of affect of different qualities are concentrated at two points in the 
manifest content. Hostile and painful impulses (in the dream itself we have the phrase 
overcome by strange emotions) overlap one another at .the point where I destroy my 
antagonistic friend with a
¹I have since explained the extraordinary effect of pleasure produced by tendency wit on 
analogous lines.
couple of words. At the end of the dream I ani greatly pleased, and am quite ready to 
believe in a possibility which I recognize as absurd when I am awake, namely, that there 
are revenants who can be swept away by a mere wish.
I have not yet mentioned the occasion of this dream. It is an important one, and leads us 
far down into the meaning of the dream. From my friend in Berlin (whom I have designated 
as Fl) I had received the news-that he was about to undergo an operation, and that 
relatives of his living in Vienna would inform me as to his condition. The first few 
messages after the operation were not very reassuring, and caused me great anxiety. I 
should have liked to go to him myself, but at that time I was afflicted with a painful 
complaint which made every, movement a torment. I now learn from the dream-thoughts that 
I feared for this dear friend's life. I knew that his only sister, with whom I bad: never 
been acquainted, had died young, after a very brief illness. (In the dream Fl tells me 
about his sister, and says: “In three-quarters of an hour she was dead'') I must have 
imagined that his own constitution was not much stronger^ and that I should soon be, 
travelling, in spite of my health in response to far worse news—and that I should 
arrive too late, for. which I should eternally reproach myself.¹ This reproach, that I 
should arrive too late, has become the central point of the dream, but it has been 
represented in a scene in which the revered teacher of - my student years---- 
Brucke—reproaches me for the same thing with a terrible look from his blue eyes. What 
brought about this alteration of the scene will soon become, apparent: the dream cannot 
reproduce the scene itself as I experienced it. To be sure, it leaves the blue eyes to 
the other man, but it gives me^ the part of the annihilator, an inversion which is 
obviously the work of the wish-fulfilment. My concern for the life of my friend, 
myself-reproach for not having gone to him, my shame (he had come to me in Vienna 
unobtrusively), my desire to consider myself excused on account of my illness--—all 
this builds up an emotional tempest which is distinctly felt in my sleep, and which rages 
in that region of the dream-thoughts.
But there was another thing in the occasion of the dream which had quite, the opposite ef
¹It is this fancy from,:, .{he unconscious dream thoughts which peremptorily demands non 
vivit instead. Of non vixit. "You have come too Jate, he is no longer alive." The fact 
that the manifest situation of the dream; aims, at the non vivit has been, mentioned on 
page 305.
feet. With the unfavourable news during the first days of the operation I received, also 
an injunction to speak to no one about, the whole affair, which hurt my feelings, for it 
betrayed an unnecessary distrust of my discretion. I knew, of course, that this request 
did not proceed from my friend, but that, it was due to clumsiness or excessive timidity 
on the part of the messenger; yet the concealed reproach affected me very disagreeably, 
because it was hot altogether unjustified. As we know; only reproaches which have 
something in them have the power to hurt. Years ago, when I was younger than I am now, I 
knew two men who were friends, and who honoured me with their friendship; and I quite 
superfluously told one of them what the other had said of him. This incident of course, 
had nothing to do with the affairs of my friend Fl, but I have never forgotten the 
reproaches to which I had to listen on that occasion. One of the two friends between whom 
If made trouble was Professor Fleischl; the other one I will call by his baptismal name, 
Josef , a name which was borne also; by my friend and antagonist P, who appears in this 
dream.
In the dream the element unobtrusively  points to the reproach that I cannot keep any 
things to myself, and so does the question of Fl as to how much of. His affairs I have 
told Pi But it is the intervention of that old memory which transposes the reproach 
for>arriving too late from the present to then time; when I was working in Brucke's 
laboratory; and; by replacing the second person in the annihilation scene of the dream by 
a Josef, I enable this scene to represent not only the first reproach that I have arrived 
more late--but also that other reproach, more strongly affected by the Repression, to the 
['effect that I do not keep secrets; The work of condensation and displacement in 'this 
dream, as well as the motives for it, are now obvious.
My present trivial annoyance at the injunction not to divulge secrets draws reinforcement 
from springs that flow far beneath the surface, and so swells to a stream of hostile 
impulses towards persons who are in reality dear to me. The source which furnishes the 
reinforcement is to be found in my childhood. I have already said that my warm 
friendships as well as my; enmities, with persons of my own age go back to my childish 
relations to my nephew, who was a year older than I. In these he had the upper hand, and 
I early learned how to defend myself; we lived together, were inseparable, and loved one 
another; but at times j as the statements of older persons testify, we used to squabble 
and accuse one another. In a certain sense, all my friends are incarnations of this first 
figure; they are all revenants. My nephew himself returned when a young man, and then we 
were like Caesar and Brutus. An intimate friend and a hated enemy have always been 
indispensable to my emotional life; I have always been able to create them anew, and not 
infrequently my childish ideal has been so closely approached that friend and enemy have 
coincided in the same person; but not simultaneously, off course, nor in constant 
alternation, as was the case in my early childhood.
How, when such associations exist, a recent occasion of emotion may cast back to the 
infantile occasion and substitute this as a cause of affect, I shall not consider now. 
Such an investigation would properly belong to the psychology of unconscious thought, or 
a psycho logical explanation of the neuroses. Let us assume, for the purposes of 
dream-interpretation, that a childish recollection presents itself, or is created by the 
phantasy with, more or less, the following content: We two children quarrel on account of 
some object-^just what we shall leave undecided, although the memory, or illusion of 
memory, has a very definite object in view-—and each claims that he got there first, 
and therefore has the first right to it. We come to blows; Might comes before Right; and, 
according to the indications of the dream, I must have known that I was in the wrong 
(noticing the error myself); but this time I am the stronger, and take possession of the 
battlefield; the defeated combatant hurries to my father, his grandfather, and accuses 
me, and I defend myself with the words, which I have heard from my father: “I hit him 
because he hit me." Thus, this recollection, or more probably phantasy, which forces 
itself upon my attention in the course of the analysis—without further evidence I 
myself do not know how—becomes a central item of the dream-thoughts, which collects the 
affective impulses prevailing in the dream-thoughts, as the bowl of a fountain collects 
the water that flows into it. From this point the dream-thoughts flow along the following 
channels: "It serves you right that you have had to make way for me; why did you try to 
push me off? I don't need you; I'll soon find someone else to play with," etc. Then the 
channels are opened through Which these thoughts flow back again into the 
dream-representation.
For such an "ote-toi que je m'y mette"¹ I once had to reproach my deceased friend Josef. 
He was next to me in the line of promotion in Brucke's laboratory, but advancement there 
was very slow. Neither of the two assistants budged from his place, and youth became 
impatient. My friend, who knew that his days were numbered, and was bound by no intimate 
relation to his superior, sometimes gave free expression to his impatience. As this 
superior was a man seriously ill, the wish to see him removed by promotion was 
susceptible of an obnoxious secondary interpretation. Several years, earlier,, to be 
sure; T myself had cherished, even more intensely, the same wish—to obtain a post which 
had fallen vacant; wherever there are gradations of rank and promotion the way is opened 
for the suppression of covetous wishes. Shakespeare's Prince Hal cannot rid himself of 
the temptation to see how the crown fits, even at the bedside of his sick father. But, as 
may readily be understood, the dream inflicts this inconsiderate wish not upon me, but 
upon my friend.²
"As he was ambitious, I slew him." As he could not expect that the other man would make 
way for him, the man himself has been put out of the way. I harbour these thoughts 
immediately after attending the unveiling of the Memorial to the other man at the 
University. Part of the satisfaction which I feel in the dream may therefore be 
interpreted: A just punishment; it serves you right.
At the funeral of this friend a young man made the following remark, which seemed rather 
out of place: "The preacher talked as though the world could no longer exist without this 
one human being." Here was a stirring of revolt in the heart of a sincere man, whose 
grief had been disturbed by exaggeration. But with this speech are connected the dream 
thoughts: "No one is really irreplaceable; how many men have I already escorted to the 
grave! But I am still alive; I have survived them all; I claim the field." Sucha thought, 
at the moment when I fear that if I make a journey to see him I shall find my friend no 
longer among the living, permits only of the further development that I am glad once more 
to have survived someone; that it is not I who have died but he; that I am master of the 
field, as
¹Make room for me.—Ed.
²It will have been obvious that the name Josef plays a great part in my dreams (see the 
dream about my uncle). It is particularly easy for me to hide my ego in my dreams behind 
persons of this name, since Joseph was the name of the dream-interpreter in the Bible.

once I was in the imagined scene of my childhood. This satisfaction, infantile in origin, 
at the fact that I am master of the field, covers the greater part of the affect which 
appears in the dream. I am glad that I am the survivor; I express this sentiment with the 
naive egoism of the husband who says to his wife: "If one of us dies, I shall move to 
Paris." My expectation takes it as a matter of course that I am not the one to die.
It cannot be denied that great self-control is needed to interpret one's dreams and to 
report them. One has to reveal oneself as the sole villain among all the noble souls with 
whom one shares the breath of life. Thus, I find it quite comprehensible that revenants 
should exist only as long as one wants them, and that they can be obliterated by a wish. 
It was for this reason that my friend Josef was punished. But the revenants are the 
successive incarnations of the friend of my childhood; I am also gratified at having 
replaced this person for myself over and over again, and a substitute will doubtless soon 
be found even for the friend whom l am-now-on-the point of losing. No one is 
irreplaceable.
But what has the dream-censorship been doing in the meantime? Why does it not raise the 
most emphatic objection to a train of thoughts characterized by such brutal selfishness, 
and transform the satisfaction inherent therein into extreme discomfort? I think it is 
because other unobjectionable trains of thought referring to the same persons result also 
in satisfaction, and with their affect cover that proceeding from the forbidden infantile 
sources. In another stratum of thought I said to myself, at the ceremony of unveiling the 
memorial: "I have lost so many dear friends, some through death, some through the 
dissolution of friend ship; is it not good that substitutes have presented themselves, 
that I have gained a friend who means more to me than the others could, and whom I shall 
now always retain, at an age when it is not easy to form new friend ships ?" The 
gratification of having found this substitute for my lost friend can be taken over into 
the dream without interference, but behind it there sneaks in the hostile feeling of 
malicious gratification from the infantile source. Childish affection undoubtedly helps 
to reinforce the rational affection of today; but childish hatred also has found its way 
into the representation.
But besides this, there is in the dream a distinct reference to another train of thoughts 
which may result in gratification. Some time before this, after long waiting, a little 
daughter was born to my friend. I knew how he had grieved for the sister whom he had lost 
at an early age, and I wrote to him that I felt that he would transfer to this child the 
love he had felt for her, that this little girl would at last make him forget his 
irreparable loss.
Thus this train also connects up with the intermediary thoughts of the latent dream 
content, from which paths radiate in the most contrary directions: "No one is 
irreplaceable. See, here are only revenants; all those whom one has lost return." And now 
the bonds of association between the contradictory components of the dream-thoughts are 
more, tightly drawn by the accidental circumstance that my friend's little daughter bears 
the same name as the girl playmate of my own youth, who was just my own age, and the 
sister of my oldest friend and antagonist. I heard the name Pauline with satisfaction, 
and in order to allude to this coincidence I replaced one Josef in the dream by another 
Josef, and found it impossible to suppress .the identical initials in the name Fleischl 
and Fl. From this point a train of thought runs to the naming of my own children. I 
insisted that the names should not be chosen according to the fashion of the day, but 
should be determined by regard for the memory of those dear to us. The children's names 
make them, revenants. And, finally, is not the procreation of children for all men the 
only way Of access to immortality?
I shall add only a few observations as to the affects of dreams considered from another 
point of view. In the psyche of the sleeper an affective tendency—what we call a 
mood—may be contained as its dominating element, and may induce a corresponding mood in 
the dream. This mood may be the result of the experiences and thoughts of the day, or it 
may be of somatic origin; in either case it will be accompanied by the corresponding 
trains of thought. That this ideational content of the dream-thoughts should at one time 
determine the affective tendency primarily, while at another time it is awakened in a 
secondary manner by the somatically determined emotional disposition, is in different for 
the purposes of dream-formation. This is always subject to the restriction that it can 
represent only a wish-fulfilment, and that it may lend its psychic energy to the wish 
alone. The mood actually present will receive the same treatment as the sensation which 
actually emerges during sleep (cf. p. 234), which is either neglected or reinterpreted in 
the sense of a wish-fulfilment. Painful moods during sleep become the motive force of the 
dream, inasmuch as they awake energetic wishes which the dream has to fulfil. The 
material in which they inhere is elaborated until it is serviceable for the expression of 
the wish-fulfilment. The more intense and the more dominating the element of the painful 
mood in the dream-thoughts, the more surely will the most strongly suppressed 
wish-impulses take advantage of the opportunity to secure representation; for thanks to 
the actual existence of discomfort, which otherwise they would have to create 
spontaneously, they find that the more difficult part of the work necessary to ensure 
representation has already been accomplished; and with these observations we touch once 
more upon the problem of anxiety-dreams, which will prove to be the boundary-case of 
dream-activity.
I. The Secondary Elaboration
We Will at last turn our attention to the fourth of the factors participating in 
dream-formation.
If we continue our investigation of the dream-content on the lines already laid down— 
that is, by examining the origin in the dream-thoughts of conspicuous occurrences—we 
come upon elements that can be explained only by making an entirely new assumption. I 
have in mind cases where one manifests astonishment, anger, or resistance in a dream, and 
that, too, in respect of part of the dream-content itself. Most of these impulses of 
criticism in dreams are not directed against the dream-content, but prove to be part of 
the dream-material, taken over and fittingly applied, as I have already shown by suitable 
examples. There are, however, criticisms of this sort which are not so derived: their 
correlatives cannot be found in the dream-material. What, for instance, is meant by the 
criticism not infrequent in dreams: "After all, it's only a dream"? This is a genuine 
criticism of the dream, such as I might make if I were awake. Not infrequently it is only 
the prelude to waking; even oftener it is preceded by a painful feeling, which sub sides 
when the actuality of the dream-state has been affirmed. The thought: "After all, it's 
only a dream" in the dream itself has the same intention as it has on the stage on the 
lips of Offenbach's Belle Helene; it seeks to minimize what has just been experienced, 
and to secure indulgence for what is to follow. It serves to lull to sleep a certain 
mental agency which at the given moment has every occasion to rouse itself and forbid the 
continuation of the dream, or the scene. But it is more convenient to go on sleeping and 
to tolerate the dream, "because, after all, it's only a dream." I imagine that the 
disparaging criticism: "After all, it's only a dream," appears in the dream at the moment 
when the censorship, which is never quite asleep, feels that it has been surprised by the 
already admitted dream. It is too late to suppress the dream, and the agency therefore 
meets with this remark the anxiety or painful emotion which rises into the dream. It is 
an expression of the esprit d'escalier on the part of the psychic censorship.
In this example we have incontestable proof that everything which the dream contains does 
not come from the dream-thoughts, but that a psychic function, which cannot be 
differentiated from our waking thoughts, may make contributions to the dream-content. The 
question arises, does this occur only in exceptional cases, or does the psychic agency; 
which is otherwise active only as the censorship, play a constant part in 
dream-formation? 
One must decide unhesitatingly for the latter view. It is indisputable that the censoring 
agency, whose influence we have so far recognized only in the restrictions Of and 
omissions in the dream-content, is likewise responsible for interpolations in and 
amplifications of this content. -Often these interpolations are readily recognized; they 
are introduced with hesitation, prefaced by an "as if"; they have no special vitality of 
their own, and are constantly inserted at points where they may serve to connect two 
portions Of the dream-content or create a continuity between two sections of the dream. 
They manifest less ability to adhere in the memory than do the genuine products of the 
dream-material; if the dream is forgotten, they are forgotten first, and I strongly 
suspect that our frequent complaint that although We have dreamed so much we have 
forgotten most of the dream, and have remembered only fragments, is explained by the 
immediate falling away of just these cementing thoughts. In a complete analysis, these 
interpolations are often betrayed by the fact that no material is to be found for them in 
the dream-thoughts. But after careful examination I must describe this case as the less 
usual one; in most cases the interpolated thoughts can be traced' to material in the 
dream-thoughts which can claim a place in the dream neither by its own merits nor by way 
of over-determination. Only in the most extreme cases does the psychic function in 
dream-formation which we are now considering rise to original creation: whenever possible 
it makes use of anything{appropriate that it can find in the dream-material. 
What distinguishes this part. of the dreamwork, and also betrays it, is its tendency. 
This function proceeds in a manner which the poet maliciously attributes to the 
philosopher:;with its rags and tatters it stops up the breaches, in the structure of the 
dream. The result of its efforts is that the dream loses the appearance of absurdity and 
incoherence,, and approaches the pattern of an intelligible experience. But the effort.is 
not always crowned with complete success. Thus, dreams occur which may, upon superficial, 
examination, seem faultlessly logical and correct; they start from a possible-situation, 
continue it by means of consistent changes, and bring it—although this is rare— to a 
not unnatural conclusion. These, dreams have been subjected to the most searching 
elaboration by a psychic function similar to our waking thought; they seem to have a 
meaning, but this meaning is very far removed from the real meaning of the dream. If we 
analyse them, we are convinced that the secondary elaboration has handled the material 
with the greatest freedom, and has retained as little as possible of its proper 
relations. These are the dreams which have, so to speak, already been once interpreted 
before we subject them to waking interpretation. In other dreams this tendencious 
elaboration has succeeded only up to a point; up to this point consistency seems to 
prevail, but then the dream becomes non sensical or confused; but perhaps before it 
concludes it may once more rise to a semblance of rationality. In yet other dreams the 
elaboration has failed completely; we find ourselves helpless, confronted with: a 
senseless mass of fragmentary contents.
I do not wish to deny to this fourth dream forming power, which will soon become familiar 
to us—it is in reality the only one of the four dream-creating factors which is 
familiar to us in other connections—I do not wish to deny to this fourth factor the 
faculty of creatively making new contributions to our dreams. But its influence is 
certainly exerted, like that of the other factors, mainly in the preference and selection 
of psychic material already formed in the dream-thoughts. Now there is a case where it is 
to a great extent spared the work of building, as it were, a facade to the dream by the 
fact that such a structure, only waiting to be used, already exists in the material of 
the dream-thoughts. I am accustomed to describe the element of the dream-thoughts which l 
have in mind as phantasy-; I shall perhaps avoid misunderstanding If I at once point to 
the day-dream as an analogy in waking life.¹
The part played by this element in our psychic life has not yet been fully recognized and 
revealed by psychiatrists; though M; Benedikt has, it seems to me, made a highly 
promising beginning. Yet the significance of the day-dream has not escaped the unerring 
insight of the poets; we are all familiar with the description of the day-dreams of one 
of his subordinate characters which Alphonse Daudet; has given us in his Nabab. The study 
of the psycho neuroses discloses the astonishing fact .that these phantasies or 
day-dreams are the immediate predecessors of symptoms of hysteria-at least, of a great 
many of them; for hysterical symptoms are dependent not upon Actual memories, but upon 
the phantasies built up on a basis of memories. The frequent occurrence of conscious 
day-phantasies brings; these formations to our ken; but while some of these phantasies 
are conscious^ there is, a super abundance of unconscious phantasies, which must perforce 
remain unconscious: on account of their content and their origin in repressed material. A 
more thorough examination of the character of these day-phantasies shows with what good 
reason the same name has been given to these formations as to the products of nocturnal 
thought—dreams. They have essential features in common with nocturnal dreams; indeed, 
the investigation of day-dreams might really have afforded the shortest and best approach 
to the understanding of nocturnal dreams.
Like dreams, they are wish-fulfilments; like dreams, they are largely based upon the 
impressions of childish experiences; like dreams, they obtain a certain indulgence from 
the censorship in respect of their creations. If we trace their formation, we become 
aware how the wish-motive which has been operative in their production has taken the 
material of which they are built, mixed it together, rearranged it, and fitted it 
together into a new whole. They bear very much the same relation to the childish memories 
to which they refer as many of the baroque palaces of Rome bear to the ancient ruins, 
whose hewn stones and columns have furnished the material for the structures built in the 
modern style.
¹Reve, petit roman=day-dream, story. 
In the secondary elaboration of the dream-content which we have ascribed to our fourth 
dream-forming factor, we find once more the very same activity which is allowed to 
manifest itself, uninhibited by other influences, in the creation of day-dreams. We may 
say, without further preliminaries, that this fourth factor of ours seeks to construct 
something like a day-dream from the material which offers it self. But where such a 
day-dream has already been constructed in the context of the dream thoughts, this factor 
of the dream-work will prefer to take possession of it, and contrive that it gets into 
the dream-content. There are dreams that: consist merely of the repetition of a 
day-phantasy, which as perhaps remained unconscious—as, for instance, the boy's dream 
that he is riding in a war-chariot with the heroes of the Trojan war. In my Autodidasker 
dream the second part of the dream at least is the faithful repetition of a 
day-phantasy— harmless in itself—-of my dealings with Professor N. The fact that the 
exciting phantasy forms only a part of the dream, or that only a part of it finds its way 
into the dream-con tent, is due to the complexity of the conditions which the dream must 
satisfy at its genesis. On the whole, the phantasy is treated like any other component of 
the latent material; but it is often still recognizable as a whole in the dream. In my 
dreams there are often parts which are brought into prominence by their producing a 
different impression from that produced by the other parts. They seem to me to be in a 
state of flux, to be more coherent and at the same time more transient than other 
portions of the same dream. I know that these are unconscious phantasies which find their 
way into the context of the dream, but I have never yet succeeded in registering such a 
phantasy. For the rest, these phantasies, like all the other component parts of the 
dream-thoughts, are jumbled together, condensed, superimposed, and so on; but we find all 
the transitional stages, from the case in which they may constitute the dream-content, or 
at least the dream-facade, unaltered, to the most contrary case, in which they are 
represented in the dream content by only one of their elements, or by a remote allusion 
to such an element. The fate of the phantasies in the dream-thoughts is obviously 
determined by the advantages they can offer as against the claims of the censorship and 
the pressure of condensation.
In my choice of examples for dream-interpretation I have, as far as possible, avoided 
those dreams in which unconscious phantasies play a considerable part, because the 
introduction of this psychic element would have necessitated an extensive discussion of 
the psychology of unconscious thought. But even in this connection I cannot entirely 
avoid the phantasy, because it often finds its way into the dream complete, and still 
more Often perceptibly glimmers through it. 1 might mention yet one more dream, which 
seems to be composed of two distinct and opposed phantasies, overlapping here and there, 
of which the first is superficial, while the second becomes, as it were, the 
interpretation at the first.¹
The dream—it is the only one of which I possess no careful notes—is roughly to this 
effect: The dreamer—-a young unmarried man -is sitting in his favourite inn, which is 
seen correctly; several persons come to fetch him, among them someone who wants to arrest 
him. Be says to his table companions, "I will pay later, I am coming back." But they cry, 
smiling scornfully: "We know all about that; that's] what everybody says." One guest 
calls after, him: "There goes another one." He is then lea to a small place where he 
finds a woman with d child in her arms. One of his escorts says: "This is Herr Muller." A 
commissioner or some other official is running through a bundle of tickets or papers, 
repeating Muller, Muller, Muller. At last the commissioner asks him a question, which he 
answers with a "Yes." He then takes a look at the woman, and notices that she has grown a 
large beard.
The two component parts are here easily separable. What is superficial is the phantasy of 
being arrested; this seems to be newly created by the dream-work. But behind it the 
phantasy of marriage is visible, and this material, on the other hand, has been slightly 
modified by the dream-work, and the features which may be common to the two phantasies 
appear with special distinctness, as in Galton's composite photographs. The promise of 
the young man, who is at present a bachelor, to
¹I have analysed an excellent example of a dream of this kind, having its origin in the 
stratification of several phantasies, in the Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of 
Hysteria (Collected Papers, vol. III). I undervalued the significance of such phantasies 
for dream-formation as long as I was working principally on my own dreams, which were 
rarely based upon day-dreams but most frequently upon discussions and mental conflicts. 
With other persons it is often much easier to prove the complete analogy between the 
nocturnal dream and the day-dream. In hysterical patients an attack may often be replaced 
by a dream; it is then obvious that the day-dream phantasy is the first step for both 
these psychic formations.
return to his place at his accustomed table—the scepticism pf his drinking companions, 
made wise by their many experiences-their calling after him: "There goes (marries) 
another owe"—-are all features easily susceptible of the other interpretation, as is 
the affirmative answer given to the official. Running through a bundle of papers and 
repeating the same name, corresponds to a subordinate but easily recognized feature of 
the marriage ceremony—-the reading aloud of the congratulatory telegrams, which have 
arrived at irregular intervals, and which, of course, are all addressed to the same name. 
In the personal appearance of the bride in this dream the marriage phantasy has even got 
the better of the arrest phantasy which screens it. The fact that this bride finally 
wears a beard I can explain from information received —I had no opportunity of making 
an analysis. The dreamer had, on the previous day, been crossing the street with a friend 
who was just as hostile to marriage as himself, and had called his friend's attention to 
a beautiful brunette who was coming towards them. The friend had remarked: "Yes, if only 
these women wouldn't get beards as they grow older, like their fathers."
Of course,, even in this dream there is no lack of elements with which the 
dream-distortion has done, deep work. Thus, the speech, "I will pay later," may have 
reference to the behaviour feared on the part of the father in law in the matter of a 
dowry. Obviously all sorts of misgivings are preventing the dreamer from surrendering 
himself with pleasure to the phantasy of marriage. One of these misgivings— that with 
marriage, he might lose his freedom has embodied itself in the transformation of a scene 
of arrest.
If we once more return to the thesis that the dream-work prefers to make use of a 
readymade phantasy, instead of first creating one from the material of the 
dream-thoughts, we shall perhaps be able to solve one pf the most interesting problems of 
the dream. I have related the dream of Maury, who is struck on the back of the neck by a 
small board, and wakes after a long dream-—a complete romance of the period of the 
French Revolution, Since the dream is produced in a coherent form, and completely fits 
the explanation of the waking stimulus, of whose occurrence the sleeper could have had no 
forboding, only one assumption seems possible, namely, that the whole richly elaborated 
dream must have been composed, and dreamed in the short interval of time between the 
falling of the board on Maury's cervical vertebrae and the waking induced by the blow. We 
should not venture to ascribe such rapidity to the mental operations of the waking state, 
so that we have to admit that the dream-work has the privilege of a remark able 
acceleration of its issue.
To this conclusion, which rapidly became popular, more recent authors (Le Lorrain, Egger, 
and others) have opposed emphatic objections; some of them doubt the correctness; of 
Maury's record of the dream, some seek to show that the rapidity of our mental operations 
in waking life is by no means inferior to that which we can, without reservation, ascribe 
to the mental operations -in dreams. The discussion raises fundamental questions, which I 
do not think are at all near, solution. But I must confess that Egger's objections, for 
example, to Maury's dream of the guillotine, do not impress me as convincing. I would 
suggest the following explanation of this dream; Is it so very improbable that Maury's 
dream may have represented a phantasy which had been pre served for years in his memory, 
in a completed states and which was awakened-I should like; to say, alluded to—at the 
moment when be became aware of the waking stimulus? The whole difficulty of composing so 
long a story, with all its details, in the exceedingly short space of time which is here 
at the dreamer’s disposal then disappears, the story was already composed. If the board 
had struck Maury’s neck when he was awake, there would perhaps have been time for the 
thought: "Why, that's just like being guillotined." But as he is struck by the board 
while asleep, the dream-work quickly utilizes the incoming stimulus for the construction 
of a wish-fulfilment, as if it thought (this is to be taken quite figuratively): "Here is 
a good opportunity to realize the wish-phantasy which I formed at such and such a time 
while I was reading." It seems to me undeniable that this dream-romance is just such a 
one as a young man is wont to construct under the influence of exciting impressions. Who 
has not been fascinated—above all, a Frenchman and a student of the history of 
civilization—by descriptions of the Reign of Terror, in which the  aristocracy men and 
women, the flower of the, nation,, showed that it was possible to die with a light heart, 
and preserved their ready wit and the refinement of their manners up to the moment of the 
last fateful summons? How tempting to fancy one self in the midst of all this, as one of 
these young men who take leave of their ladies with a kiss of the hand, and fearlessly 
ascend the scaffold! Or perhaps ambition was the ruling motive of the phantasy-the 
ambition; to put oneself in the place of one of those powerful personalities who, by 
their sheer force of intellect and their fiery eloquence, ruled the city in which the 
heart of mankind was then beating so convulsively; who were impelled by their convictions 
to send thousands of ^human beings to their death; and were paving the way for the 
transformation of Europe; who, in the meantime, were not sure of their own heads, and 
might one day lay them under the knife of the guillotine, perhaps in the role of a 
Girondist or the hero Danton? The detail pre served in the memory of the dream, 
accompanied by an enormous crowds seems to show that Maury's phantasy was an ambitious 
one of just this character.
"But the phantasy prepared so long ago need not be experienced again in sleep; it is 
enough that it should be, so to speak, “touched off." What I means this: If a few notes 
are struck, and someone says; as in Don Juan: "That is from The Marriage of Figaro» by 
Mozart," memories suddenly surge up within me, none of which I can recall to 
consciousness a moment later. The phrase serves as a point of irruption from which a 
complete whole is simultaneously put into a condition of stimulation. It may well be the 
same in unconscious thinking. Through the waking stimulus the psychic station is excited 
which gives access to the whole guillotine phantasy; This phantasy; however- is not run 
through in sleep, but only in the memory of the awakened sleeper. Upon waking, the 
sleeper remembers in detail the phantasy which was transferred as a whole in to the 
dream. At the same time, he has no means of assuring himself that he is really 
remembering something which Was dreamed. The Same explanation—namely, that one is 
dealing with finished phantasies which have been evoked as wholes by the waking stimulus 
may be applied to other dreams which are adapted to the-waking stimulus—-for example, 
to Napoleon's dream of a battle before the explosion of a bomb. Among the dreams 
collected by Justine Tobowolska in her dissertation on the apparent duration of time in 
dreams,¹ I think the most corroborative is that related by Macario (1857) as having been 
dreamed by a playwright, Casimir Bonjour.
¹Justine Tobowolska, Etude sur les illusions de temps dans les rive s du sommeil normal 
(1900), P.53.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 252c-253a
With regard to typical dreams of the death of relatives, I must add a few words upon 
their significance from the point of view of the theory of dreams in general. These 
dreams show us the occurrence of ai very unusual state of things; they show us that the 
dream-thought created by the repressed wish completely escapes the censorship, and is 
transferred to the dream without alteration. Special conditions must obtain in order to 
make this possible. The following two factors favour the production of these dreams: 
first, this is the last wish that we could credit ourselves with harbouring; we believe 
such a wish "would never occur to us even in a dream"; the dream-censorship is therefore 
unprepared for this monstrosity, just as the laws of Solon did not foresee the necessity 
of establishing  a penalty for, patricide.  Secondly, the repressed and unsuspected wish 
is,' in this special case, frequently met half-way by a residue from the day's 
experience, in the from of some concern for the life of the be loved person. This anxiety 
cannot enter into the dream otherwise than by taking advantage of the corresponding wish; 
but the wish is able to mask itself behind the concern which has been aroused, during the 
clay. If one is inclined to think that all this is really a very much simpler process, 
and to imagine that one merely continues during the night, and in one's dream, What was 
begun during the day, one remove is the dreams of the death of those dear to us but of 
all connection with the general explanation of dreams, and a problem that may very Well 
be solved remains a problem needlessly. It is instructive to trace the relation of these 
dreams to anxiety-dreams. In dreams of the death of those dear to us the repressed wish 
has found a way of avoiding the censorship— and the distortion for which the censorship 
is responsible. An invariable concomitant phenomenon, then, is that painful emotions are 
felt in the dream. Similarly, an anxiety-dream occurs only When the censorship is 
entirely or partially overpowered, and on the other hand, the overpowering of the 
censorship is facilitated when the actual sensation of anxiety is already present from1 
somatic sources. It thus becomes obvious for What purpose the censorship performs its 
office arid (practises dream-distortion; it does so in order to prevent the development 
of anxiety or other forms of painful affect. 
I have spoken in the foregoing sections of the egoism, of the child's psyche, and now 
emphasize this peculiarity in order to suggest a connection, for dreams too have retained 
this characteristic. All dreams are absolutely egoistical; in every dream the, beloved 
ego appears, even though.in, a disguised form. The wishes that are realized, in dreams 
are invariably the wishes of this ego; it is only a deceptive appearance if interest in 
another person is believed to have evoked a dream. I wilt now analyse a few examples 
which appear to contradict this assertion.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp264c- 272c
4. Upon another occasion I had a dream which consisted of two separate parts. The first 
was the vividly remembered word Autodidasker: the second was a faithful reproduction in 
the dream-content of a short and harmless fancy which had been developed a few days 
earlier, and which was to the effect that. I must tell Professor N, when I next saw him: 
"The patient about whose condition I last consulted you is really suffering from "a 
neurosis, just as you suspected." So not only must the newlycoined Autodidasker satisfy 
the requirement that it should contain or represent a com pressed meaning, but this 
meaning must have a valid connection with my resolve—repeated from waking fife—to 
give Professor N due credit for his diagnosis.
Now Autodidasker is easily separated into author (German, Autor), autodidact, and Lasker, 
with whom is associated the name Lasalle. The first of these words leads to the occasion 
of the dream—which this time is significant. I had brought home to my wife several 
volumes by a well-known author who is a friend of my brother's, and who, as I have 
learned, comes from the same neighbourhood as myself (J. J. David). One evening; she told 
me how profoundly impressed she had been by the pathetic sadness of a story in one of 
David's hovels (a story of wasted talents), and our conversation turned upon the signs of 
talent which we perceive in our own children; Under the influence of what she had just 
read, my wife expressed some concern about our children, and I comforted her with the 
remark that precisely such dangers as she feared can be averted by training. During the 
night my thoughts proceeded farther, took up my wife's concern for the children, and 
interwove with it all sorts of other things. Something which the novelist had said to my 
brother on the subject of marriage showed my thoughts a by-path which might lead to 
representation in the dream. This path led to Breslau; a lady who was a very good friend 
of ours had married and gone to live there. I found in Breslau Lasker and. Lasalle, two 
examples to justify the fear lest our hoys should be ruined by women, examples which 
enabled me to represent simultaneously two ways of ^influencing a man to his undoing.² 
The
²Lasker died of progressive paralysis; that is, of the consequences of an infection 
caught from a woman (syphilis); Lasalle, also a syphilitic, was killed in a duel which he 
fought on account of the lady whom he had been courting.
Cherchez la femme, by which these thoughts may be summarized,; leads me, if taken in an 
other sense, to; my brother> who is still unmarried and whose name is Alexander. Now, I 
see that Alex, as we abbreviate the name, sounds almost like an inversion of Lasker,arid: 
that this fact must have contributed to send my thoughts on a detour by way of Breslau. 
But the playing with names and syllables in which I am here engaged has yet another 
meaning. It represents the wish that my brother may. enjoy a happy family life, and this 
in the following manner: In the novel of artistic life, L'GLuvre, which, by virtue of its 
content, must have been in association with my dream thoughts, the author, as is 
well-known, has incidentally given a description of his own person and his own domestic 
happiness, and appears under the name of Sandoz. In the meta morphosis of his name he 
probably went to work as follows: Zola, when inverted (as children are fond of inverting 
names) gives Aloz. But this was still too undisguised; he therefore replaced the syllable 
AI, which stands at the beginning of the name Alexander, by the third syllable of the 
same name, sand, and thus arrived at Sandoz. My autodidasker originated in a similar 
fashion. 
My phantasy—that I am telling Professor N that the patient whom we have both seen is 
suffering from a neurosis—found its Way into the dream in the following manner: Shortly 
before the close of my working year, I had a patient in whose case my powers of diagnosis 
failed me. A serious organic trouble-^-possibly some alterative degeneration of the 
spinal cord- was to be assumed, but could not be conclusively demonstrated. It would have 
been tempting to diagnose the trouble as a neurosis, and this would have put an end to 
all my difficulties, but for the fact that the sexual anamnesis, failing which I am 
unwilling to admit a neurosis, was so energetically denied by the patient. In ray 
embarrassment I called to my assistance the physician Whom I respect most of all men (as 
others do also), and to whose authority I surrender most completely. He listened to my 
doubts, told me he thought them justified, and then said: "Keep on observing the man, it 
is probably a neurosis." Since I know that he does not share my opinions concerning the 
aetiology of the neuroses, I refrained from contradicting him, but I did not conceal my 
scepticism. A few days later I informed the patient that I did not know what to do with 
him; and advised him to go to someone else. Thereupon, to my great astonishment, he began 
to beg my pardon for having lied to me; he- had felt so ashamed; and now he revealed to 
me just that piece of sexual aetiology which I had expected, and which I-found necessary 
for assuming the existence of a neurosis. This was relief to me, but at the same time a 
humiliation; for: I had to admit that my consultant, who was not disconcerted by the 
absence of anamnesis, had judged the case more correctly. I made up my mind to tell him, 
when next I saw him, that he had been right and I had been wrong.
This is just what I do in the dream. But what sort of a wish is fulfilled if I 
acknowledge that I am mistaken? This is precisely my wish; I wish to be mistaken as 
regards my fears—that is to say, I wish that my wife, whose fears I have appropriated 
in my dream thoughts; may prove to be mistaken. The subject to which the fact of being 
right or wrong is related in the dream is not far removed from that which is; really of 
interest to the dream thoughts. We have the same pair of alternatives, of either organic 
or functional impairment caused by a woman, or actually by the sexual life—either 
tabetic paralysis or a neurosis—with which latter the nature of Lasalles undoing is 
indirectly connected.
In this well-constructed (and on careful analysis quite transparent) dream, Professor N 
ap pears not merely on account of this analogy, and my wish to be proved mistaken, or the 
associated references to Breslau and to the family of our married friend who lives there; 
but also on account of the following little dialogue Which followed bur consultation: 
After he had acquitted himself of his professional duties by making the above-mentioned 
suggestion, Dr. N proceeded to discuss personal matters. "How many children have you 
now?"—"Six." —A thoughtful and respectful gesture.—"Girls, boys?"—"Three of each. 
They are my pride and my riches."—"Well, you must be careful; there is no difficulty 
about the girls, but the boys are a difficulty later on as regards their upbringing." I 
replied that until now they had been very tractable; obviously this prognosis of my boys' 
future pleased me as little as his diagnosis of my patient, whom he believed to be 
suffering only from a neurosis. These two impressions, then, are connected by their 
contiguity; by their being successively received; and when I incorporate the story of the 
neurosis into the dream,. I substitute it for the conversation: on the subject of 
upbringing- which is even more closely connected with the dream thoughts; since it 
touches so closely upon the anxiety subsequently expressed by my wife. Thus, even my fear 
that N may prove to be tight in his remarks on the difficulties to be met with in 
bringing up boys is admitted into the dream-content, inasmuch as it is concealed behind 
the representation of my wish that I may be wrong to harbour such apprehensions The same 
phantasy serves without alteration to represent both the conflicting alternatives.
Examination-dreams present the same difficulties to interpretation that I have already 
described as characteristic of most typical dreams. The associative material which the 
dreamer supplies only rarely suffices for interpretation. A deeper understanding of such 
dreams has to be accumulated from a considerable number of examples. Not long ago I 
arrived at a conviction that reassurances like "But you already are a doctor," and so on, 
not only convey a consolation but imply a reproach as well. This would have run: "You are 
already so old, so-far advanced in. life, and yet you still commit such follies, are 
guilty of such criticism and consolation would correspond with the examination-dreams. 
After this it is no longer surprising that the reproaches in the last analysed examples 
concerning follies and childish behaviour should relate to repetitions of reprehensible 
sexual acts.
The verbal transformations in dreams are very similar to those which are known to occur 
in paranoia, and which are observed also in hysteria and obsessions. The linguistic 
tricks of children, who at a certain age actually treat words as objects, and even invent 
new languages and artificial syntaxes, are a common source, of such occurrences both in 
dreams and in the psychoneuroses.
The analysis of nonsensical word-formations in dreams is particularly well suited to 
demonstrate the degree of condensation effected in the dream-work. From the small number 
of the selected examples here considered it must not be concluded that such material is 
seldom observed or is at all exceptional. It is, on the contrary, very frequent, but, 
owing to the dependence of dream interpretation on psycho analytic treatment, very few 
examples are noted down and reported, and most of the analyses which are reported are 
comprehensible only to the specialist in neuropathology.
When a spoken utterance, expressly distinguished as such from a thought, occurs in a 
dreamy itis~ an invariable rule that the dreams speech has originated from a remembered 
speech in the dream-material. The wording of the speech has either been preserved in its 
entirety or has been slightly altered in expression; frequently the dream-speech is 
pieced to gether from different recollections of spoken remarks; the wording has remained 
the same, but the sense has perhaps become ambiguous, or differs from the wording. Not 
infrequently the dream-speech serves merely as an allusion to an incident in connection 
with which the remembered speech was made.¹
B. The Work of Displacement
Another and probably no less significant relation must have already forced itself upon 
our attention while we were collecting examples of dream-condensation. We may have 
noticed that these elements which obtrude themselves in the dream-content as its 
essential components do not by any means play this same part in the dream-thoughts. As a 
corollary to this the converse of this statement is also true. That which is obviously 
the essential content of the dream-thoughts need not be represented at all in the dream. 
The dream is, as it were, centred elsewhere; its content is arranged about elements which 
do not constitute the central point of the dream-thoughts. Thus, for example, in the 
dream of the botanical monograph the central point of the dream-content is evidently the 
element botanical; in the dream-thoughts, we are concerned with the complications and 
conflicts resulting from services rendered between colleagues which place them under 
mutual obligations ; later on with the reproach that I am in the habit of sacrificing too 
much time to my hobbies; and the element botanical finds no place in this nucleus of the 
dream-thoughts, unless it is loosely connected with it by antithesis, for botany was 
never among my favourite subjects. In the Sappho-dream of my patient, ascending and 
descending, being upstairs and down, is made- the central-point; the dream, however, is 
concerned with the danger of sexual relations with persons of low degree; so that only 
one of the elements of the dream-
¹In the case of a young man who was suffering from obsessions, but whose intellectual 
functions were in tact and highly developed, I recently found the only exception to this 
rule. The speeches which occurred in his dreams did not originate in speeches which he 
had heard or had made himself, but corresponded to the undistorted verbal expression of 
his obsessive thoughts, which came to his waking consciousness only in an altered form.
thoughts seems to have found its way into the dream-content, and this is unduly expanded. 
Again, in the dream of my uncle, the fair beard which seems to be its central point, 
appears to have no rational connection with the desire for greatness which we have 
recognized as the nucleus of the dream-thoughts. Such dreams very naturally give us an 
impression of a displacement. In complete contrast to these examples, the dream of Irma's 
injection shows that individual elements may claim the same place in dream-formation as 
that' which they occupy in the dream-thoughts. The recognition of this new and utterly 
inconstant relation between the dream-thoughts and the dream content will probably 
astonish us at first. If we find, in a psychic process of normal life, that one idea has 
been selected from among a number of other, and has acquired a particular emphasis in our 
consciousness, we are wont to regard this as proof that a peculiar psychic value (a 
certain degree of interest) attaches to the victorious idea. We now discover that this 
value of the individual element in the dream-thoughts is not retained in dream-formation, 
or is not taken into account. For there is no doubt which of the elements of the 
dream-thoughts are of the highest value; our judgment informs us immediately. In 
dream-formation the essential elements, those that are emphasized by in tensive interest, 
may be treated as though they were subordinate, while they are replaced in the dream by 
other elements, which were certainly subordinate in the dream-thoughts. It seems at first 
as though the psychic intensity¹ of individual ideas were of no account in their 
selection for dream-formation, but only their greater or lesser multiplicity of 
determination. One might be inclined to think that what gets into the dream is not what 
is important in the dream-thoughts, but what is contained in them several times over; but 
our understanding of dream-formation is not much advanced by this assumption; to begin 
with, we cannot believe that the two motives of multiple determination and intrinsic 
value can influence the selection of the dream otherwise than in the same direction. 
Those ideas in the dream-thoughts which are most important are probably also those which 
recur most frequently, since the individual dream-thoughts radiate from them as centres. 
And yet the dream may reject these intensely emphasized and extensively reinforced
¹The psychic intensity or value of an idea—the emphasis due to interest—is of course 
to be distinguished from perceptual or conceptual intensity.
elements, and may take up into its content other elements which are only extensively 
reinforced. 
This difficulty may be solved if we follow up yet another impression received during the 
investigation of the over-determination of the dream-content. Many readers of this 
investigation may already have decided, in their own minds, that the discovery of the 
multiple determination of the dream-elements is of no great importance, because it is 
inevitable. Since in analysis we proceed from the dream-elements, and register all the 
ideas which associate themselves with these elements is it any wonder that these elements 
should recur with peculiar frequency in the thought-material obtained in this manner? 
While I cannot admit the validity of this objection, I am now going to say something that 
sounds rather like it: Among the thoughts which analysis brings to light are many which 
are far removed from the nucleus of the dream, arid which stand out like artificial 
interpolations made for a definite purpose. Their purpose may readily be detected; they 
establish a connection, often a forced and far-fetched connection, between the 
dream-content and the dream-thoughts, and in many cases, if these elements were weeded 
out of the analysis, the components of the dream-content would riot only not be 
over-determined, but they would not be sufficiently determined- We are thus led to the 
conclusion that multiple determination, decisive as regards the selection made by the 
dream, is perhaps not always a primary factor in dream-formation, but is often a 
secondary product of a psychic force which is as yet unknown to us. Nevertheless, it must 
be of importance for the entrance of the individual elements into the dream, for we may 
observe that, in cases where multiple determination does not proceed easily from the 
dream material, it is brought about with a certain effort.
It now becomes very probable that a psychic force expresses itself in the dream-work 
which, on the one hand, strips the elements of the high psychic value of their intensity 
and, on the other hand, by means of over-determination, creates new significant values 
from elements of slight value, which new values then make their way into the 
dream-content. Now if this is the method of procedure, there has occurred in the process 
of dream-formation a transference and displacement of the psychic intensities of the 
individual elements, from which results the textual difference between the process which 
we, here assume to be, operative is actually the most essential part of the dreamwork; it 
may fitly, be called dream-displacement. Dream-displacement and dream-condensation are 
the, two craftsmen to whom we may chiefly, ascribe the structure of the dream.  
I think it will be easy to recognize the psychic force which expresses itself in 
dream-displacement. The result of this displacement is that the dream-content no longer 
has any likeness to the nucleus of the dream-thoughts, and the dream reproduces only a 
distorted, form of the dream-wish in the unconscious. But we are already acquainted .with 
dream-distortion; we have traced it back to the censorship which one psychic instance in 
the psychic life exercises over another, Dream-displacement is one of the chief means of 
achieving this distortion. Is fecit, cui pro fuit.¹ We must assume that 
Dream-displacement is brought about by the influence of this censorship, the endopsychic 
defence.²
The manner in which the factors pi displacement, condensation and over-determination in-
¹“The doer gained."
²Since I Regard the attribution of dream-distortion to the censorship as the central 
point of my conception of the dream, I Will here quote the closing passage of a story, 
Traumen wie Wachen from Phantasien eines, Realisten by Lynkeus (Vienna  second edition 
[1900]) in which  I find, this chief feature of my doctrine reproduced:
"Concerning  a man who possesses the remarkable faculty of never dreaming nonsense. ..."
"Your marvellous faculty of dreaming as if you were awake is based upon  your virtues, 
upon your goodness, your justice, and your love of truth; it is the moral clarity of your 
nature which makes everything about you intelligible to me."
"But if I really, give thought to the matter," was the reply, "I almost believe that all 
men are made as I am, arid that no one ever dreams nonsense! A dream which one remembers 
so distinctly that one can relate it afterwards, and which, therefore, is no dream of 
delirium, always has a meaning; why, it cannot be otherwise! For that which is in 
contradiction, to itself can never be combined, into a. whole. The fact that time and 
space are often thoroughly shaken up, de tracts not at all from the real content of the 
dream, because both are without any significance, whatever for its essential content. We 
often. do' the same thing in waking life; think of fairy-tales, of so many bold and 
pregnant creations of fantasy, of which only a foolish person would say: 'That is' 
nonsense! For it isn't possible?"
“If only it were always possible to interpret dreams correctly, as you have just done 
with, mine!" said, the friend.
“That is certainly not an easy task, but with a little attention it must always be 
possible to the dreamer. You ask why it is generally impossible? In your case there seems 
to be something veiled in your dreams, something unchaste in. a special and exalted 
fashion, a certain secrecy in your nature, which it is difficult to fathom; and that is 
why your dreams so often seem to. be without, meaning, Or even nonsensical. But in the 
profoundest sense, this is by no means ' the case; indeed it cannot be, for a man is 
always the same person, whether he wakes or dreams."

teract with one another in dream-formation- which is the ruling factor and which the 
subordinate one-all this will be reserved as a subject for later investigation. In the 
meantime, we may state, as a second condition which, the elements -that find their, way 
into the dream must satisfy, that they must be withdrawn from; the resistance 0} the 
censorship. But henceforth, in the interpretation of dreams, we shall reckon with 
dream-displacement as an unquestionable fact.
C. The Means of Representation in Dreams
Besides the two factors of condensation and displacement in dreams,, which we have found 
to be at work in the transformation of the latent dream--material into the, ,.manifest 
dream-content, we shall, in the course of this investigation, come upon two further 
conditions which exercise an unquestionable influence, over; the selection of the 
material that eventually appears in. the dream. But first, even at the risk of seeming 
to. interrupt our progress, I shall take a preliminary:=glance rat the processes by which 
the interpretation of dreams is accomplished, I do not deny that the best way of 
explaining them, and of convincing, the critic of their reliability, would, be to take a. 
single dream as an example, to detail its interpretation, as I did (in Chapter II) in the 
case of the dream, of Irma's injection, but then to assemble the dream-thoughts which I 
had discovered, and from them to reconstruct the formation of the dream—-that is to 
say, to supplement dreams-analysis by dream-synthesis. I have done this with several 
specimens for my own instruction; but I cannot undertake to do it, here, as, I am 
prevented by a number of considerations (relating to the psychic material necessary for 
such a demonstration) such as any right-thinking person would approve. In the analysis of 
dreams these considerations present-less difficulty, for an analysis may be incomplete 
and still retain its value, even if it leads only a little way into the structure of the 
dream. I do, not see how a synthesis, to be convincing, could be anything short of 
complete. I could give a complete synthesis only of the dreams of such persons as are 
unknown to the reading public. Since, however, neurotic patients are the only, persons 
who furnish me with; the means of making such a synthesis, this part of the description 
of dreams must be postponed until I can carry the psychological explanation of the 
neuroses far enough to demonstrate their relation to our subject.1 This will be done else 
where.
From my attempts to construct dreams syn thetically from their dream-thoughts, I know 
that the material which is yielded by interpretation varies in value. Part of it consists 
of the: essential dream-thoughts, which would completely replace the dream and would in 
themselves be a sufficient substitute for it, were there no dream-censorship. To the 
other part, one is wont to ascribe slight importance, nor does one set any value on the 
assertion that all these thoughts have participated in the formation of the dream; oh the 
contrary, they may include notions Which are associated with experiences that have 
occurred subsequently to the dream, between the dream and the interpretation.
This part comprises not only all the connecting-paths which have led from the manifest to 
the latent dream-content, but also the intermediate and approximating associations by 
means of which one has arrived at acknowledge of these connecting-paths during the work 
of interpretation.
At this point we are^ interested exclusively in the essential dream-thoughts; These 
commonly reveal themselves as a complex of thoughts and memories of the most intricate  
possible construction with all the characteristics of the thought- processes known to us 
in waking life. Not infrequently they are trains of thought which proceed from more than 
one centre, but which are not without points of contact; and almost invariably we find, 
along with a train of thought, its contradictory counter part, connected with it by the 
association of contrast. 
The individual parts of this complicated structure naturally stand in the most manifold 
logical relations to one another. They constitute foreground and background, digressions, 
illustrations conditions, lines of argument and objections. When the whole mass of these 
dream-thoughts is -subjected' to the pressure of the dream-Work, during which the 
fragments are turned about/ broken up and compacted, somewhat like drifting ice, the 
question arises: What becomes of the logical ties which had hitherto provided the 
framework of the structure? What representation do if, because, as
¹I have since given the complete analysis and synthesis of two dreams in the Brtichstuck 
einer  Hysterieamlyse, (1905) (Ges. Schriften, Vol.;.VII). "Fragment of an Analysis of a 
Case of Hysteria," translated by Strachey, Collected Tapers, Vol. m, (Hogarth Press, 
London). O. Rank's analysis, Em Traum der sich selbst deutet, deserves mention as the 
most complete interpretation of a comparatively long dream.
though, although, either—or and all the other conjunctions, without which we cannot: 
understand a phrase or a sentence, receive in cut dreams? 
To begin with, we must answer that the dream has at its. disposal no means of 
representing these logical relations between the dream-thoughts. In most cases it 
disregards all these conjunctions and undertakes the elaboration only of the material 
content of the dream-thoughts. It is left to the interpretation of the dream to restore 
the coherence which the. dream-work has destroyed.
If dreams lack the ability to express, these relations, the psychic material of which 
they are wrought must be responsible for this defect. As a matter of fact, the 
representative arts— painting and sculptures—are similarly restricted, as compared 
with poetry, which is able to employ speech; and here again the reason for this 
limitation lies in the material by the elaboration of which the two plastic arts 
endeavour to express something. Before the art of painting arrived at an understandings 
of the laws of expression by which it is bound, it attempted to make up lor this 
deficiency. In old paintings little labels hung out of the mouths of the persons 
represented, giving in- writing the speech which the artist despaired of expressing in 
the picture.
Here, perhaps an objection will be raised, challenging the assertion that our dreams 
dispense with the representation, of logical relation. There are dreams in which the most 
complicated! intellectual operations take placed arguments for and against are adduced 
jokes and comparisons are made, just as in our waking thoughts. But here again 
appearances are deceptive; if the interpretation of such dreams is continued it will be 
found that all these things are dream-material, not the representation of intellectual 
activity in the dream: The-content of the; dream-thoughts' is reproduced by the apparent 
thinking in our dreams, but hot the relations of the dream-thoughts to one another, in 
the determination of which relations thinking consists. I shall give some examples of 
this. But the fact which is most easily established is that all speeches which occur in 
dreams, and which are expressly designated as such, are unchanged or drily- slightly 
modified replicas of -speeches which occur likewise among the memories in the dream 
material. Often the each is only an allusion to an event contained in the dream-thoughts; 
the meaning of the dream is quite different.
However, I shall not dispute the fact that even critical thought-activity, which does not 
simply repeat material from the dream thoughts, plays a part in dream-formation. I shall 
have to explain the influence of this factor at the close of this discussion. It will 
then become clear that this thought activity is evoked not by the dream-thoughts, but by 
the dream itself, after it is, in, a certain sense, already completed.
Provisionally, then, it is agreed that the logical relations between the dream-thoughts 
do not obtain any particular representation in the dream. For instance, where there is a 
contradiction in the dream, this is either a contradiction directed against the dream 
itself or a contradiction contained in one of the dream-thoughts; a contradiction in the 
dream corresponds with a contradiction between the dream-thoughts only in the most 
indirect and intermediate fashion.
But just as the art of painting finally succeeded in depicting, in the persons 
represented, at least the intentions behind their words- tenderness, menace, admonition, 
and the like— by other means than by floating labels, so also the dream has found it 
possible to render an account of certain of the logical relations between its 
dream-thoughts by an appropriate modification of the peculiar method of dream 
representation. It will be found by experience that different dreams go to different 
lengths in this respect; while one dream will entirely dis regard the logical structure 
of its material, an other attempts to indicate it as completely as, possible. In so 
doing, the dream departs more: or less widely from the text which it has to elaborate; 
and its attitude is equally variable in respect to the temporal articulation of the 
dream-thoughts, if such has been established in the unconscious (as, for example, in the 
dream of Irma's injection).
But what are the means by which the dream-work is enabled to indicate those relations in 
the dream-material which are difficult to represent? I shall attempt to enumerate these, 
one by one.
In the first place, the dream renders an account of the connection which is undeniably 
present between all the portions of the dreams-thoughts by combining this material into a 
unity as. a situation or a proceeding. It reproduces logical connections in the form of 
simultaneity; in this case, it behaves rather like the painter who groups together all 
the philosophers or poets in a picture of the School of Athens, or Parnassus. They never 
were assembled in any hall or on any mountain-top, although to. the reflective mind they 
do constitute a community.
The dream carries out in detail this mode of representation. Whenever it shows two 
elements close together, it vouches for a particularly intimate connection between their 
corresponding representatives in the dream-thoughts. It is as in our method of writing: 
to signifies that the two letters are to be pronounced as one syllable; while t with o 
following a blank space indicates that t is the last letter of one word and 0 the first 
letter of another. Consequently, dream-combinations are not made up. of arbitrary, 
completely incongruous elements of the dream-material, but of elements that are pretty 
intimately related in the dream-thoughts also.
For representing causal relations our dreams employ two methods, which are essentially 
reducible to one. The method of representation more frequently employed-in cases, for 
example, where the dream-thoughts are to the effect: "Because this was thus and thus, 
this and that must happen"—consists in making the subordinate clause a prefatory dream 
and joining the principal clause on to it in the form of the main dream. If my 
interpretation is correct, the sequence may likewise be reversed. The principal clause 
always corresponds; to that part of the dream which is elaborated in the greatest detail.
An excellent example of such a representation of causality was once provided by a female 
patient, whose dream I shall subsequently give in full. The dream consisted of a short 
prologue, and of a very circumstantial and very definitely centred dream-composition. I 
might entitle it "Flowery language." The preliminary dream is as follows: She goes to the 
two maids in the kitchen and scolds them for taking so long to prepare" a little bite of 
food." She also sees a very large number of heavy kitchen uten sils in the kitchen turned 
upside down in order to drain, even heaped up in stacks. The two maids go to fetch water, 
and have, as it were, to climb into a river, which reaches up to the, house or into the 
courtyard.
Then follows the main dream, which begins; as follows: She is climbing down from a height 
over a curiously shaped trellis, and she is glad that her dress doesn't get caught 
anywhere, etc. Now the preliminary dream refers to the house of the lady's parents. The 
words which are spoken in the kitchen are words which she has probably often heard spoken 
by her mother.
The piles of clumsy pots and pans are taken from an unpretentious hardware shop located 
in the same house. The second part of this dream contains an allusion to the dreamers 
father, who was always pestering the maids, and who during a flood—for the house stood 
close to the bank of the river—contracted a fatal illness. The thought which is 
concealed behind the preliminary dream is something like this: "Because I was born in 
this house, in such sordid and unpleasant surroundings . . ." The main dream takes up the 
same thought, and presents it in a form that has been altered by a wish-fulfilment: "I am 
of exalted origin." Properly then: "Because I am of such humble origin, the course of my 
life has been so and so."
As far as I can see, the division of a dream into two unequal portions does not always 
signify a causal relation between the thoughts of the two portions. It often seems as 
though in the two dreams the same material were present ed from different points of view; 
this is certainly the case when a series of dreams, dreamed the same night, end in a 
seminal emission, the somatic need enforcing a more and more definite expression. Or the 
two dreams have proceeded from two separate centres in the dream-material, and they 
overlap one another in the content, so that the subject which in one dream constitutes 
the centre cooperates in the other as an allusion, and vice versa. But in a certain 
number of dreams the division into short preliminary dreams and long subsequent dreams 
actually signifies a causal relation between the two portions. The other method of 
representing the causal relation is employed with less comprehensive material, and 
consists in the transformation of an image in the dream into another image, whether it be 
of a person or a thing. Only where this transformation is actually seen occurring in the 
dream shall we seriously insist on the causal relation; not where we simply note that one 
thing has taken the place of another. I said that both methods of representing the causal 
relation are really reducible to the same method; in both cases causation is represented 
by succession, sometimes by the succession of dreams, sometimes by the immediate 
transformation of one image into another. In the great majority of cases, of course, the 
causal relation is not represented at all, but is effaced amidst the succession of 
elements that is unavoidable even in the dream-process.
Dreams are quite incapable of expressing the alternative either—or; it is their custom 
to take both members of this alternative into the same context, as though they had an 
equal right to be: there. A classic example of this is contained in the dream of Irma's 
injection. Its latent thoughts obviously mean: I am not re sponsible for the persistence 
of Irma's pains; the responsibility rests either with her resistance to accepting the 
solution or with the fact that she is living under unfavourable sexual conditions, which 
I am unable to change, or her pains are not hysterical at all, but organic. The dream, 
however, carries out all these possibilities, which are almost mutually exclusive, and is 
quite ready to add a fourth solution derived from the dream-wish. After interpreting the 
dream, I then inserted the either—or in its context in the dream-thoughts.
But when in narrating a dream the narrator is inclined to employ the alternative 
either—or: "It was either a garden or a living-room," etc., there is not really an 
alternative in the dream thoughts, but an and—a simple addition. When we use 
either—or we are as a rule describing a quality of vagueness in some element of the 
dream, but a vagueness which may still be cleared up. The rule to be applied in this case 
is as follows: The individual members of the alternative are to be treated as equal and 
connected by an and. For instance, after waiting long and vainly for the address of a 
friend who is travelling in Italy, I dream that I receive a telegram which gives me the 
address. On the telegraph form I see printed in blue letters: the first word is 
blurred—perhaps via or villa; the second is distinctly Sezerno, or even (Casa).
The second word, which reminds me of Italian names, and of our discussions on etymology, 
also expresses my annoyance in respect of the fact that my friend has kept his address a 
secret from me; but each of the possible first three words may be recognized on analysis 
as an independent and equally justifiable starting point in the concatenation of ideas. 
During the night before the funeral of my father I dreamed of a printed placard, a card 
or poster rather like the notices in the waiting rooms of railway stations which announce 
that smoking is prohibited. The sign reads either:
You are requested to shut the eyes
or
You are requested to shut one eye 
an alternative which I am in the habit of representing in the following form:
You are requested to shut the one eye(s).
Each of the two versions has its special meaning, and leads along particular paths in the 
dream-interpretation. I had made the simplest possible funeral arrangements, for I knew 
what the deceased thought about such matters. Other members of the family, however, did 
not approve of such puritanical simplicity; they; thought we should feel ashamed in the 
presence of the other mourners/Hence one of the wordings of the dream asks for the 
shutting of one eye, that is to say, it asks that people should show consideration. The 
significance of the vagueness, which is here represented by an either—or, is plainly to 
be seen. The dreamwork has not succeeded in concocting a coherent and yet ambiguous 
wording for the dream thoughts. Thus the two principal trains of thought are separated 
from each other, even in the dream-content.
In some few cases the division of a dream into two equal parts expresses the alternative 
which the dream finds it so difficult to present.
The attitude of dreams to the category of antithesis and contradiction is very striking. 
This category is simply ignored; the word No does not seem to exist for a dream. Dreams 
are particularly fond of reducing antitheses to uniformity, or representing them as one 
and the same thing. Dreams likewise take the liberty of representing any element whatever 
by its desired opposite, so that it is at first impossible to tell, in respect of any 
element which is capable of having an opposite, whether it is contained in the 
dream-thoughts in the negative of the positive sense,¹ In one of the recently cited 
dreams, whose introductory portion we have already interpreted ("because my origin is so 
and so"), the dreamer climbs down over a trellis, and holds a blossoming bough in her 
hands. Since this picture suggests to her the angel in paintings of the Annunciation (her 
own name is Mary) bearing a lily-stem in his
¹From a work of K. Abel's, Der Gegensinn der Urworte, (1884), (see my review of it in 
the Bleuler- Freud Jahrbuch, ii (191-0) (Ges. Schriften, Vol. x). I learned the 
surprising fact, which is confirmed by other philologists, that the oldest languages 
behaved just as dreams do in this regard. They had originally only one word for both 
extremes in a series of qualities or activities (strong—weak, old—young, far—near, 
bind—separate), and formed separate designations for the two opposites only 
secondarily, by slight modifications of the common primitive word. Abel demonstrates a 
very large number of those relationships in ancient Egyptian, and points to distinct 
remnants of the same development in the Semitic and Indo-Germanic languages.
hand, and the white-robed girls walking in procession on Corpus Christi Day, when =the 
streets are decorated with green boughs, the blossoming bough in the dream is quite 
clearly an allusion to sexual innocence. But the bough is thickly studded with red 
blossoms, each of which resembles a camellia. At the end of her walk (so the dream 
continues) the blossoms are: already beginning to fall; then follow un mistakable 
allusions to menstruation. But this very bough, which is carried like a lily-stem and as 
though by an innocent girl, is also an allusion to Camille, who, as we know, usually wore 
a white camellia, but a red one during menstruation. The same blossoming bough ("the 
flower of maidenhood" in Goethe's songs of the miller's daughter) represents at once 
sexual innocence and its opposite. Moreover, the same dream, which expresses the 
dreamer's joy at having succeeded in passing through life unsullied, hints in several 
places (as in the falling of the blossom) at the opposite train of thought, namely, that 
she had been guilty of various sins against sexual purity (that is, in her childhood). In 
the analysis of the dream we may clearly distinguish the two trains of thought, of which 
the comforting one seems to be superficial, and the reproachful one more profound. The 
two are diametrically opposed to each other, and their similar yet contrasting elements 
have been represented by identical dream-elements. 
The mechanism of dream-formation is favourable in the highest degree to only one of the 
logical relations. This relation is that of similarity, agreement, contiguity, just as; a 
relation which may be represented in our dreams, as no other can be, by the most varied 
expedients. The screening which occurs in the dream-material, or the cases of just as are 
the chief points of support for dream-formation, and a not inconsiderable part of the 
dreamwork consists in creating new screenings of this kind in cases where those that 
already exist are prevented by the resistance of the censorship from making their Way 
into the dream. The effort towards condensation evinced by the dream-work facilitates the 
representation of a relation of similarity.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 282a-285b
In spite of this versatility, we may say that the representation effected by the 
dream-work, which was never even intended to be understood, does not impose upon the 
translator any greater difficulties than those that the ancient writers of hieroglyphics 
imposed upon their readers.
I have already given several examples of dream-representations which are. held together 
only by ambiguity of expression (her mouth opens without difficulty, in the dream of 
Irma's injection; I cannot go yet after all, in the last dream related, etc.). I shall 
now cite a dream in the analysis of which plastic representation of the abstract thoughts 
plays a greater part. The difference between such dream-interpretation and the 
interpretation by means of symbols may nevertheless be clearly defined; in the symbolic 
interpretation of dreams, the key to the symbolism is selected arbitrarily by the 
interpreter, while in our own cases of verbal disguise these keys are universally known 
and are taken from established modes of speech. Provided one hits on the right idea on 
the right occasion, one may solve dreams of this kind, either completely or in part, 
independently of
¹Compare Wit and its Relation to the Unconscious.
any statements made by the dreamer.
A lady, a friend of mine, dreams: She is at the opera. It is a Wagnerian -performance, 
which has lasted until 7.45 in the morning. In the stalls and pit there are tables, at 
which people are eating and drinking. Her cousin and his young wife, who have just 
returned from their honeymoon, are sitting at one of these tables; beside them is a 
member of the aristocracy. The young wife is said to have brought him back with her from 
the honeymoon quite openly, just as she might have brought back a hat. In the middle of 
the stalls there is a high tower, on the top of which there is a platform surrounded by 
an iron railing. There, high over head, stands the conductor, with the features of Hans 
Richter, continually running round behind the railing, perspiring terribly; and from this 
position he is conducting the orchestra, which is arranged round the base of the tower. 
She herself is sitting in a box with a friend of her own sex (known to me). Her younger, 
sister tries to hand her up, from the stalls, a large lump of coal, alleging that she had 
not known that it would be so long, and that she must by this time be miserably cold. (As 
though the boxes ought to have been heated during the long performance.)
Although in other respects the dream gives; a good picture of the situation, it is, of 
course, nonsensical enough: the tower in the middle of the stalls, from which the 
conductor leads the orchestra, and above all the coal which her sister hands up to her. I 
purposely asked for no analysis of this dream. With some knowledge of the personal 
relations of the dreamer, I was able to interpret parts of it independently of her. I 
knew that she had felt intense sympathy for a musician whose career had been prematurely 
brought to an end by insanity. I therefore decided to take the tower in the stalls 
verbally. It then emerged that the man whom she wished to see in the place of Hanst 
Riehter towered above all the other members of the orchestra. This tower must be 
described as a composite formation by means of apposition; by its substructure it 
represents the greatness of the man, but by the railing at the top, behind which he runs 
round like a prisoner or an animal in a cage (an allusion to the name of the unfortunate 
man),² it represents his later fate. Lunatic-tower is perhaps the expression in which 
the two thoughts might have met. Now that we have discovered the dream's method of 
representation, we may try, with
²Hugo Wolf.
the same key, to unlock the meaning of the second apparent absurdity, that of the coal 
which her sister hands up to the dreamer. Coal should mean secret love.
No fire, no coal so hotly glows
As the secret love of which no one knows.
She and her friend remain seated¹ while her younger sister, who still has a prospect of 
marrying, hands her up the coal because she did not know that it would be so long. What 
would be so long is not told in the dream. If it were an anecdote, we should say the 
performance; but in the dream we may consider the sentence as it is, declare it to be 
ambiguous, and add before she married. The interpretation secret love is then confirmed 
by the mention of the cousin who is sitting with his wife in the stalls, and by the open 
love-affair attributed to the latter. The contrasts between secret and open love, between 
the dreamer's fire and the coldness of the young wife, dominate the dream. Moreover, here 
once, again there is a person, in a high position as a middle term between the aristocrat 
and the musician who is justified in raising high hopes.
In the above analysis we have at last brought to light a third factor, whose part in the 
transformation of the dream-thoughts into the dream-content is by no means trivial: 
namely, consideration of the suitability of the dream thoughts for representation in the 
particular psychic material of which the dream makes use—that is, for the most part in 
visual images. Among the various subordinate ideas associated with the essential 
dream-thoughts, those will be preferred which permit of visual representation, and the 
dream-work does not hesitate to recast the intractable thoughts into another verbal form, 
even though this is a more unusual form, provided it makes representation possible, and 
thus puts an end to the psychological distress caused by strangulated thinking. This 
pouring of the thought content into another mould may at the same time serve the work of 
condensation, and may establish relations with another thought which otherwise would not 
have been established. It is even possible that this second thought may itself have 
previously changed its original expression for the purpose of meeting the first one half 
way.
Herbert Silberer² has described a good meth
¹The German sitzen geblieben is often applied to women who have not succeeded in getting 
married.— TR.
²Bleuler-Freud Jahrbuch, i (1909).

od of directly observing the transformation of thoughts into images which occurs in 
dream-formation, and has thus made it possible to study in isolation this one factor of 
the dreamwork. If, while in a state of fatigue and somnolence, he imposed upon himself a 
mental effort, it frequently happened that the thought escaped him, and in its place 
there appeared a picture in which he could recognize the substitute for the thought. Not 
quite appropriately, Silberer described this substitution as auto symbolic. I shall cite 
here a few examples from Silberer's work, and on account of certain peculiarities of the 
phenomena observed I shall refer to the subject later on.
"Example 1.1 remember that I have to correct a halting passage in an essay.
"Symbol. I see myself planing a piece of wood.
"Example 5.1 endeavour to call to mind the aim of certain metaphysical studies which I am 
proposing to undertake.
"This aim, I reflect, consists in working one's way through, while seeking for the basis 
of existence, to ever higher forms of consciousness or levels of being.
"Symbol. I run a long knife under a cake as though to take a slice out of it.
"Interpretation. My movement with the knife signifies working one's way through. . . . 
The explanation of the basis of the symbolism is as follows: At table it devolves upon me 
now and again to cut and distribute a cake, a business which I perform with a long, 
flexible knife, and which necessitates a certain amount of care. In particular, the neat 
extraction of the cut slices of cake presents a certain amount of difficulty; the knife 
must be carefully pushed under the slices ,in question (the-slow working one's way 
through in order to get to the bottom). But there is yet more symbolism in the picture. 
The cake of the symbol was really a dobosrcake—that is, a cake in which the knife has 
to cut through several layers (the levels of consciousness and thought).
"Example 9. I lost the thread in a train of thought. I make an effort to find it again, 
but I have to recognize that the point of departure has completely escaped me.
"Symbol. Part of a form of type, the last lines of which have fallen out."
In view of the part played by witticisms, puns, quotations, songs, and proverbs in the 
intellectual life of educated persons, it would be entirely in accordance with our 
expectations to find ^disguises of this sort used with extreme frequency in the 
representation of the dreams thoughts. Only in the case of a few types of material has a 
generally valid dream-symbolism, established^ itself on the basis of generally known 
allusions and verbal equivalents. A good part of this symbolism, however, is common to 
the psychoneuroses, legends, and popular us ages as Well. as to dreams.
In fact, if we look more closely into, the matter, we: must recognize that in employing 
this kind of. substitution the dream-work is doing nothing at all original. For the 
achievement of its purpose, which in this case Is representation without interference 
from the censorship, it simply follows the paths which it finds already marked out in 
unconscious thinking, and gives the preference to those transformations of the repressed 
material which are permitted to become conscious also in the form of witticisms and 
allusions, and with which all the phantasies of neurotics are replete. Here we suddenly 
begin to understand the dream-interpretations of Seherner, whose essential correctness I 
have vindicated elsewhere. The preoccupation of the imagination with One's own body is by 
no means peculiar to or characteristic of the dream alone. My analyses have shown me that 
it is constantly found in the unconscious thinking of neurotics, and may be traced back 
to sexual curiosity, whose object, in the adolescent youth or maiden, is ,the genitals of 
the opposite sex, or even of the. same sex. But, as Schemer and Volkelt very truly 
insist, the house does, not constitute the only group of. Ideas which is employed for the 
symbolization of the body, either in dreams or in the unconscious phantasies of neurosis. 
To be sure, I know patients who have steadily adhered to an architectural symbolism for 
the body and the genitals (sexual interest, of course, extends far beyond the region of 
the external genital organs)—patients for whom posts and pillars signify legs (as in 
the Song of Songs), to whom every door suggests a bodily aperture (hole), and every 
water-pipe the urinary system, and so on. But the groups of ideas appertaining to 
plant-life, or to the kitchen, are just, as often chosen to conceal sexual images;¹ in 
respect of the former everyday language, the sediment of imaginative comparisons dating 
from the remotest times, has abundantly paved the way (the vineyard of the Lord, the seed 
of Abra
¹A mass of corroborative material may be found in the three supplementary volumes ..of 
Edward Fuchs's Illustrierte Sittengeschichte; privately printed by A. Lange; Munich. 
ham, the garden of the maiden in the Song of Songs). The ugliest as well as the most 
intimate details of sexual life may be thought or dreamed of in apparently innocent 
allusions to culinary operations, and the symptoms, of hysteria will become absolutely 
unintelligible if we forget that sexual symbolism may conceal itself behind the most 
commonplace and inconspicuous matters as its safest hiding-place. That some neurotic 
children cannot look at blood and raw meat, that they vomit at the, sight of eggs and 
macaroni, and that the dread of snakes, which is natural to mankind, is monstrously 
exaggerated in neurotics—-all this has a definite sexual meaning! Wherever the neurosis 
employs a disguise of this sort, it treads the paths once trodden by the whole of 
humanity in the early stages of civilization—paths to whose thinly veiled existence our 
idiomatic expressions, proverbs, superstitions, and customs testify to this day.
I here insert the promised flower-dream of a female patient,, in which I shall print in 
Roman type everything which is to be sexually interpreted. This beautiful dream lost all 
its charm for the dreamer once it had been interpreted.
(a). Preliminary dream: She goes to the two maids in the kitchen and scolds them for 
taking so long to prepare a little bite of food. She also sees a very large number of 
heavy kitchen utensils in the kitchen, heaped into piles and turned upside down in order 
to drain. Later addition: The two maids go to fetch water, and have, as it were, to climb 
into a river which reaches up to the house or into the courtyard.²
(b) Main dream: ³ She is descending from a height⁴ over curiously constructed 
railings, or a fence which is composed of large square trellis-work hurdles with small 
square apertures.⁵ It is really not adapted for climbing; she is constantly afraid that 
she cannot find a place for her foot, and she is glad that her dress doesn't get caught 
anywhere, and that she is able to climb il so respectably.⁶ As she climbs
²For the interpretation of this preliminary dream, which is to be regarded as causal, 
see p. 266.
³Her career.
⁴Exalted origin, the wish-contrast to the preliminary dream.
⁵A composite formation; which unites two localities, the so-called garret (German: 
Boden="floor," "garret") of her father's house, in which she used to play with her. 
brother, the object of her later phantasies, and the farm of a malicious uncle, who used 
to tease her.
⁶Wish-Contrast to an actual memory of her uncle's farm, to the effect that she used to 
expose herself while she was asleep.

she is carrying a big branch in her hand,¹ really like a tree, which is thickly studded 
with red flowers; a spreading branch, with many twigs.² With this is connected the idea 
of cherry-blossoms (Bluten=flowers), but they look like fully opened camellias, which of 
course do not grow on trees. As she is descending, she first has one, then suddenly two, 
and then again only one.³ When she has reached the ground the lower flowers have already 
begun to fall. Now that she has reached the bottom she sees' an "odd man" who is combing 
as she would like to put it—just such a tree, that is, with a piece of wood he is 
scraping thick bunches of hair from it, which hang from it like moss. Other men have 
chopped off such branches in a garden, and have flung them into the road, where they are 
lying about, so that a number of people take some of them. But she asks whether this is 
right, whether she may take one, too.⁴ In the garden there stands a young man (he is a 
foreigner, and known to her) toward whom she goes in order to ask him how it is possible 
to transplant such branches in her own garden.⁵ He embraces her, whereupon she 
struggles and asks him what he is thinking of, whether it is permissible to embrace her 
in such a manner. He says there is nothing wrong in it, that it is permitted.⁶ He then 
declares himself willing to go with her into the other garden, in order to show her how 
to put them in, and he says something to her which she does not quite understand: 
"Besides this I need three metres (later she says: square metres) or three fathoms of 
ground?' It seems as though he were asking her for something in return for his 
willingness, as though he had the intention of indemnifying (reimbursing) himself in her 
garden, as though he wanted to evade some law of other, to derive some advantage from it 
without causing her an injury. She does not know whether of not he really shows1 her 
anything. 
The above dream, which has been given prominence on account of its symbolic elements, may 
be described as a biographical
¹Just as the angel bears a lily-stem in the Annunciation.
²For the explanation of this composite formation, see p. 268; innocence, menstruation, 
La Dame aux Camelias.
³Referring to the plurality of the persons who serve her phantasies.
⁴Whether it is permissible to masturbate. [Sich einen herunterreissen means "to pull 
off' and colloquially "to masturbate."—TR.]
⁵The branch (Ast) has long been used to represent the male organ, and, moreover, 
contains a very distinct allusion to the family name of the dreamer.,
⁶Refers to matrimonial precautions, as does that which immediately follows.

dream. Such dreams occur frequently in psycho-analysis, but perhaps only rarely outside 
it.⁷ 
I have, of course, an abundance of such material, but.to reproduce it here would lead us 
too far into the consideration of neurotic conditions. Everything points to same 
conclusion, namely, that we need not assume that any special symbolizing activity of the 
psyche is operative in dream-formation; that, on the contrary, the dream makes use of 
such symbolizations as are to be found ready-made in unconscious thinking, since these, 
by reason of their ease of representation, and for the most part by reason of their being 
exempt from the censorship, satisfy more effectively the requirements of dream formation.
⁷An analogous biographical dream is recorded on p. 287, among the examples of. dream 
symbolism.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 332a-333b
A striking feature of the neurotic character, namely, that in it causes capable of 
evoking affect produce results which are qualitatively justified but quantitatively 
excessive, is to be explained on these lines, in so far as.it admits of a psychological 
explanation at all. But the excess of affect proceeds from unconscious and hitherto 
suppressed affective sources which are able to establish an associative connection with 
the actual occasion, and for whose liberation of affect the unprotested and permitted 
source of affects opens up the desired path. Our attention is thus called to the fact 
that the relation of mutual inhibition must not be regarded as the only relation 
obtaining between the suppressed and the suppressing psychic institution. The cases in 
which ^the two institutions bring about a pathological result by co-operation. and mutual 
reinforcement deserve just as much, attention; These hints regarding the psychic 
mechanism will contribute to-our understanding of the expressions of affects in dreams. A 
gratification which makes its appearance in a dream, and which, of course, may readily be 
found in its proper place in the dream-thoughts, may not always be fully explained by 
means of this reference. As a rule, it is necessary to search for a second source in the 
dream-thoughts, upon which the pressure of the censorship rests, and which, under this 
pressure, would have yielded not gratification but the contrary effect, had it not been 
enabled by the presence of the first dream-source to free its gratification-affect from 
repression, and. reinforce the gratification springing, from the other source. Hence 
affects which appear in dreams appear to be formed by the confluence of several 
tributaries, and are over-determined in respect of the material of the dream-thoughts; 
Sources of affect which are able to furnish the same affect combine in the dream-work in 
order to produce it.¹
Some insight into these involved relations is gained from the analysis of the admirable 
dream in which Won vixit constitutes the central point (cf. p. 304). In this dream 
expressions of affect of different qualities are concentrated at two points in the 
manifest content. Hostile and painful impulses (in the dream itself we have the phrase 
overcome by strange emotions) overlap one another at .the point where I destroy my 
antagonistic friend with a
¹I have since explained the extraordinary effect of pleasure produced by tendency wit on 
analogous lines.
couple of words. At the end of the dream I ani greatly pleased, and am quite ready to 
believe in a possibility which I recognize as absurd when I am awake, namely, that there 
are revenants who can be swept away by a mere wish.
I have not yet mentioned the occasion of this dream. It is an important one, and leads us 
far down into the meaning of the dream. From my friend in Berlin (whom I have designated 
as Fl) I had received the news-that he was about to undergo an operation, and that 
relatives of his living in Vienna would inform me as to his condition. The first few 
messages after the operation were not very reassuring, and caused me great anxiety. I 
should have liked to go to him myself, but at that time I was afflicted with a painful 
complaint which made every, movement a torment. I now learn from the dream-thoughts that 
I feared for this dear friend's life. I knew that his only sister, with whom I bad: never 
been acquainted, had died young, after a very brief illness. (In the dream Fl tells me 
about his sister, and says: “In three-quarters of an hour she was dead'') I must have 
imagined that his own constitution was not much stronger^ and that I should soon be, 
travelling, in spite of my health in response to far worse news—and that I should 
arrive too late, for. which I should eternally reproach myself.¹ This reproach, that I 
should arrive too late, has become the central point of the dream, but it has been 
represented in a scene in which the revered teacher of - my student years---- 
Brucke—reproaches me for the same thing with a terrible look from his blue eyes. What 
brought about this alteration of the scene will soon become, apparent: the dream cannot 
reproduce the scene itself as I experienced it. To be sure, it leaves the blue eyes to 
the other man, but it gives me^ the part of the annihilator, an inversion which is 
obviously the work of the wish-fulfilment. My concern for the life of my friend, 
myself-reproach for not having gone to him, my shame (he had come to me in Vienna 
unobtrusively), my desire to consider myself excused on account of my illness--—all 
this builds up an emotional tempest which is distinctly felt in my sleep, and which rages 
in that region of the dream-thoughts.
But there was another thing in the occasion of the dream which had quite, the opposite ef
¹It is this fancy from,:, .{he unconscious dream thoughts which peremptorily demands non 
vivit instead. Of non vixit. "You have come too Jate, he is no longer alive." The fact 
that the manifest situation of the dream; aims, at the non vivit has been, mentioned on 
page 305.
feet. With the unfavourable news during the first days of the operation I received, also 
an injunction to speak to no one about, the whole affair, which hurt my feelings, for it 
betrayed an unnecessary distrust of my discretion. I knew, of course, that this request 
did not proceed from my friend, but that, it was due to clumsiness or excessive timidity 
on the part of the messenger; yet the concealed reproach affected me very disagreeably, 
because it was hot altogether unjustified. As we know; only reproaches which have 
something in them have the power to hurt. Years ago, when I was younger than I am now, I 
knew two men who were friends, and who honoured me with their friendship; and I quite 
superfluously told one of them what the other had said of him. This incident of course, 
had nothing to do with the affairs of my friend Fl, but I have never forgotten the 
reproaches to which I had to listen on that occasion. One of the two friends between whom 
If made trouble was Professor Fleischl; the other one I will call by his baptismal name, 
Josef , a name which was borne also; by my friend and antagonist P, who appears in this 
dream.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, esp 339b-340a
If we once more return to the thesis that the dream-work prefers to make use of a 
readymade phantasy, instead of first creating one from the material of the 
dream-thoughts, we shall perhaps be able to solve one pf the most interesting problems of 
the dream. I have related the dream of Maury, who is struck on the back of the neck by a 
small board, and wakes after a long dream-—a complete romance of the period of the 
French Revolution, Since the dream is produced in a coherent form, and completely fits 
the explanation of the waking stimulus, of whose occurrence the sleeper could have had no 
forboding, only one assumption seems possible, namely, that the whole richly elaborated 
dream must have been composed, and dreamed in the short interval of time between the 
falling of the board on Maury's cervical vertebrae and the waking induced by the blow. We 
should not venture to ascribe such rapidity to the mental operations of the waking state, 
so that we have to admit that the dream-work has the privilege of a remark able 
acceleration of its issue.
To this conclusion, which rapidly became popular, more recent authors (Le Lorrain, Egger, 
and others) have opposed emphatic objections; some of them doubt the correctness; of 
Maury's record of the dream, some seek to show that the rapidity of our mental operations 
in waking life is by no means inferior to that which we can, without reservation, ascribe 
to the mental operations -in dreams. The discussion raises fundamental questions, which I 
do not think are at all near, solution. But I must confess that Egger's objections, for 
example, to Maury's dream of the guillotine, do not impress me as convincing. I would 
suggest the following explanation of this dream; Is it so very improbable that Maury's 
dream may have represented a phantasy which had been pre served for years in his memory, 
in a completed states and which was awakened-I should like; to say, alluded to—at the 
moment when be became aware of the waking stimulus? The whole difficulty of composing so 
long a story, with all its details, in the exceedingly short space of time which is here 
at the dreamer’s disposal then disappears, the story was already composed. If the board 
had struck Maury’s neck when he was awake, there would perhaps have been time for the 
thought: "Why, that's just like being guillotined." But as he is struck by the board 
while asleep, the dream-work quickly utilizes the incoming stimulus for the construction 
of a wish-fulfilment, as if it thought (this is to be taken quite figuratively): "Here is 
a good opportunity to realize the wish-phantasy which I formed at such and such a time 
while I was reading." It seems to me undeniable that this dream-romance is just such a 
one as a young man is wont to construct under the influence of exciting impressions. Who 
has not been fascinated—above all, a Frenchman and a student of the history of 
civilization—by descriptions of the Reign of Terror, in which the  aristocracy men and 
women, the flower of the, nation,, showed that it was possible to die with a light heart, 
and preserved their ready wit and the refinement of their manners up to the moment of the 
last fateful summons? How tempting to fancy one self in the midst of all this, as one of 
these young men who take leave of their ladies with a kiss of the hand, and fearlessly 
ascend the scaffold! Or perhaps ambition was the ruling motive of the phantasy-the 
ambition; to put oneself in the place of one of those powerful personalities who, by 
their sheer force of intellect and their fiery eloquence, ruled the city in which the 
heart of mankind was then beating so convulsively; who were impelled by their convictions 
to send thousands of ^human beings to their death; and were paving the way for the 
transformation of Europe; who, in the meantime, were not sure of their own heads, and 
might one day lay them under the knife of the guillotine, perhaps in the role of a 
Girondist or the hero Danton? The detail pre served in the memory of the dream, 
accompanied by an enormous crowds seems to show that Maury's phantasy was an ambitious 
one of just this character.
"But the phantasy prepared so long ago need not be experienced again in sleep; it is 
enough that it should be, so to speak, “touched off." What I means this: If a few notes 
are struck, and someone says; as in Don Juan: "That is from The Marriage of Figaro» by 
Mozart," memories suddenly surge up within me, none of which I can recall to 
consciousness a moment later. The phrase serves as a point of irruption from which a 
complete whole is simultaneously put into a condition of stimulation. It may well be the 
same in unconscious thinking. Through the waking stimulus the psychic station is excited 
which gives access to the whole guillotine phantasy; This phantasy; however- is not run 
through in sleep, but only in the memory of the awakened sleeper. Upon waking, the 
sleeper remembers in detail the phantasy which was transferred as a whole in to the 
dream. At the same time, he has no means of assuring himself that he is really 
remembering something which Was dreamed. The Same explanation—namely, that one is 
dealing with finished phantasies which have been evoked as wholes by the waking stimulus 
may be applied to other dreams which are adapted to the-waking stimulus—-for example, 
to Napoleon's dream of a battle before the explosion of a bomb. Among the dreams 
collected by Justine Tobowolska in her dissertation on the apparent duration of time in 
dreams,¹ I think the most corroborative is that related by Macario (1857) as having been 
dreamed by a playwright, Casimir Bonjour.
¹Justine Tobowolska, Etude sur les illusions de temps dans les rive s du sommeil normal 
(1900), P.53.

54 FREUD:  Interpretation of Dreams, 356d- 373a passim
An observation of a general nature, which may possibly point to something of importance, 
may here be interpolated. The P-system, which possesses no capacity for preserving 
changes, and hence no memory, furnishes to conscious ness the complexity and variety of 
the sensory qualities. Our memories, on the other hand; are unconscious in themselves; 
those that are most deeply impressed form no, exception. They can be made conscious, but 
there is no doubt that they unfold all their activities in the unconscious state. What we 
term our character is based, indeed, on the memory-traces of our impressions, and it is 
precisely those impressions that have affected us most strongly, those of our early 
youth, which hardly ever become conscious. But when memories become conscious again they 
show no sensory quality, or a very negligible one in comparison with the perceptions. If, 
now, it can be confirmed that for consciousness memory and quality are mutually exclusive 
in the if ψ-systems, we have gained a most promising insight into the determinations of 
the neuron excitations.¹
What we have so far assumed concerning the composition of the psychic apparatus at 
¹Since writing this, I have thought that consciousness occurs actually in the locality 
of the memory trace. (Cf. "Notiz iiber den Wiinderblock" 1925, Ge's. Schriften, Vol. vi.)
the sensible end has been assumed regardless of dreams and of the psychological 
explanations which we have hitherto derived from them. Dreams, however, will serve as a 
source of evidence for Our knowledge of another part of the apparatus. We have seen that 
it was impossible to explain dream-formation unless we ventured to assume two psychic 
instances, one of which subjected the activities of the other to criticism, the result of 
which was exclusion from consciousness. 
We have concluded that the criticizing in stance maintains closer relations with the 
consciousness than the instance criticized It stands between the latter'- and the 
consciousness like a screen: Further, we have found that there is reason to identify the 
criticizing instance with that which directs our waking life and determines our voluntary 
conscious activities: If, in accordance with our assumptions, we now replace these 
instances by systems, the criticizing system will therefore be moved to the motor end. We 
now enter both systems in bur diagram, expressing, by the names given them, their 
relation to consciousness.






The last of the systems at the motor end we call the preconscious (Pes.) to denote that 
the exciting processes in this system can reach consciousness without any further 
detention, provided certain other conditions are fulfilled, e.g., the attainment of a 
definite degree of intensity, a certain apportionment of that function which we must call 
attention, etc. This-is at the same time the system which holds the keys of voluntary 
motility. The system behind it we call the unconscious (Ucs), because it has no access to 
consciousness except through the preconscious, in the passage through which the 
excitation-process must submit to certain changes.¹
In which of these systems, then, do we localize the impetus to dream-formation? For the 
sake of simplicity, let us say in the system Ucs. We shall find, it is true, in 
subsequent discussions, that this is not altogether correct;
¹The further elaboration of this linear diagram will have to reckon with: the: 
assumption' that the system following the Pes--represents the one to Which we must 
attribute consciousness (Cs), so that P = Cs.
that dream-formation is obliged to make connection with dream thoughts which belong to 
the system of the preconscious. But we shall learn elsewhere, when we come to deal with 
the dream-wish, that the motive-power of the dream is furnished by the Ucs, and on 
account of this factor we shall assume the unconscious system as the starting-point for 
dream-formation. This dream-excitation, like all the other thought-structures, will now 
strive to continue itself in the Pes, and thence to gain admission to the consciousness.
Experience teaches us that the path leading through the preconscious to consciousness is 
closed to the dream-thoughts during the day by the resisting censorship. At night they 
gain ad mission to consciousness; the question arises: In what way and because of what 
changes? If this admission were rendered possible to the dreams-thoughts by the 
weakening, during the night, of the resistance watching on the boundary between the 
unconscious and the preconscious, we should then have dreams in the material of our 
ideas, which would not display the hallucinatory character that interests us at present. 
''
The weakening of the censorship between the two systems, Ucs and Pcs, can explain to us 
only such dreams as the Autodidasker dream but not' dreams like that of the burning 
child, which—as will be remembered—we stated as a problem at the: outset in bur 
present investigations. 
What takes ^place in the hallucinatory dream we can describe in ho other way than by 
saying that the excitation follows a retrogressive course. It communicates itself not to 
the motor end of the apparatus, but to the sensory end, and finally reaches the system of 
perception. If we call the direction which the psychic process follows from the 
unconscious into the waking state progressive, we may then speak of the dream as having a 
regressive character.²
This regression is therefore assuredly one of the most important psychological 
peculiarities of the dream-process; but we must not forget that it is not characteristic 
of the dream alone. Intentional recollection and other component
²The first indication of the element of regression is already encountered in the; 
writings of Albertus Magnus-According to him the imagination constructs the dream out of 
the tangible objects which it has retained, The process is the converse of that operating 
in the waking state. Hobbes states (Leviathan, ch. 2): "In sum our dreams are the reverse 
of our imagination, the motion, when we are awake, beginning at one end, and when we 
dream at another" (quoted by Havelock Ellis, loc. cit., p. 112).
processes of our normal thinking likewise necessitate a retrogression in the psychic 
apparatus from some complex act of ideation to the raw material of the memory-traces 
which underlie it. But during the waking state this turning backwards does not reach 
beyond the memory images; it is incapable of producing the hallucinatory revival of the 
perceptual images. Why is it otherwise in dreams? When we spoke of the condensation-work 
of the dream we could not avoid the assumption that by the dreamwork the intensities 
adhering to the ideas are completely transferred from one to another. It is probably this 
modification of the usual psychic process which makes possible the cathexis ¹of the 
system of P to its full sensory vividness in the reverse direction to thinking. 
I hope that we are not deluding ourselves as regards the importance of this present 
discussion. We have done nothing more than give a name to an inexplicable phenomenon. We 
call it regression if the idea in the dream is changed back into the visual image from 
which it once originated. But even this step requires justification. Why this definition 
if it does not teach us anything new? Well, I believe that the word regression is of 
service to us, inasmuch as it connects a fact familiar to us with the scheme of the 
psychic apparatus endowed with direction. At this point, and for the first time, we shall 
profit by the fact that we have constructed such a scheme. For with the help of this 
scheme we shall perceive, without further reflection, another peculiarity of 
dream-formation. If we look upon the dream as a process of regression within the 
hypothetical psychic apparatus, we have at once an explanation of the empirically proven 
fact that all thought-relations of the dream-thoughts are either lost in the dream-work 
or have difficulty in achieving expression. According to our scheme, these 
thought-relations are contained not in the first mem-systems, but in those lying farther 
to the front, and in the regression to the perceptual images they must forfeit 
expression. In regression, the structure of the dream-thoughts breaks up into its raw 
material.
But what change renders possible this regression which is impossible during the day? Let 
us here be content with an assumption. There must evidently be changes in the cathexis of 
the individual systems, causing the latter to become more accessible or inaccessible to 
the
¹From the Greek Kathexo, to occupy, used here in place of the author's term Besetzung, 
to signify a charge or investment of energy.—TR.
discharge of the excitation; but in any such apparatus the same effect upon the course of 
the excitation might be produced by more than one kind of change. We naturally think of 
the sleeping state, and of the many cathectic changes which this evokes at the sensory 
end of the apparatus. During the day there is a continuous stream flowing from the system 
of the P toward the motility end; this current ceases at night, and can no longer block 
the flow of the current of excitation in the opposite direction. This would appear to be 
that seclusion from the outer world which, according to the theory of some writers, is 
supposed to explain the psychological character of the dream. In the explanation of the 
regression of the dream we shall, however, have to take into account those other 
regressions which occur during morbid waking states. In these other forms of regression 
the explanation just given plainly leaves us in the lurch. Regression occurs in spite of 
the uninterrupted sensory current in a progressive direction.
The hallucinations of hysteria and paranoia, as well as the visions of-mentally normal 
persons, I would explain as corresponding, in fact, to regressions, I.e., to thoughts 
transformed into images; and would assert that only such thoughts undergo this 
transformation as are in intimate connection with suppressed memories, or with memories 
which have remained unconscious. As an example, I will cite the case of one of my 
youngest hysterical patients—a boy of twelve, who was prevented from falling asleep by 
"green faces with red eyes," which terrified him. The source of this manifestation was 
the suppressed, but once conscious memory of a boy whom he had often seen four years 
earlier, and who offered a warning example of many bad habits, including masturbation, 
for Which he was now reproaching himself. At that time his mother had noticed that the 
complexion of this ill-mannered boy was greenish and that he had red (i.e., red-rimmed) 
eyes. Hence his terrifying vision, which merely determined his recollection of another 
saying of his mother's, to the effect that such boys become demented, are unable to learn 
anything at school, and are doomed to an early death. A part of this prediction came true 
in the case of my little patient; he could not get on at school, and, as appeared from 
his involuntary associations, he was in terrible dread of the remainder of the prophecy. 
However, after a brief period of successful treatment his sleep was restored, his anxiety 
removed, and he finished his scholastic year with an excellent record.
Here I may add the Interpretation of a vision described to me by an hysterical woman of 
forty, as having occurred when she was in normal health. One morning she opened her eyes 
and saw her brother in the room, although she knew him to be confined in an insane 
asylum. Her little son was asleep by her side. Lest the child should be frightened on 
seeing his uncle, and fall into convulsions, she pulled the sheet over his face. This 
done, the phantom disappeared. This apparition was the revision of one of her childish 
memories, which, although conscious was most intimately connected with all the 
unconscious material in her mind. Her nurserymaid had told her that her mother, who had 
died young (my patient was then only eighteen months old), had suffered from epileptic or 
hysterical convulsions, which dated back to a fright caused by her brother (the patient's 
uncle) who appeared to her disguised as a spectre with a sheet over his head. The vision 
contains the same elements as the reminiscence, viz., the appearance Of the brother, the 
sheet, the fright, and its effect. These elements, however, are arranged in a fresh 
content, and are transferred to other persons. The obvious motive of the 'vision, and the 
thought which it replaced, was her solicitude lest her little son, who bore a striking 
resemblance to his uncle, should share the latter's fate.
Both examples here cited are not entirely unrelated to the state of sleep, and may for 
that reason be unfitted to afford the evidence for the sake of which I have cited them. I 
will, therefore, refer to my analysis of an hallucinatory paranoic woman patient¹ and to 
the results of my hitherto unpublished studies on the psychology of the psychoneuroses, 
in order to emphasize the fact; that in these cases of regressive thought-transformation 
one must not overlook the influence of a suppressed memory, or one that has remained 
unconscious, this being usually of an infantile character. This memory draws into the 
regression, as it were, the thoughts with which it is connected, and which are kept from 
expression by the censorship—that is, into that form of representation in which the 
memory itself is psychically existent. And here I may add, as a result of my studies of 
hysteria, that if one succeeds in bringing to consciousness infantile scenes
¹Selected Papers on Hysteria, "Further Observations on the Defence-Neuro-Psychoses," p. 
97 above.
(whether they are recollections or phantasies) they appear as hallucinations, and are 
divested 6f this character only when they are communicated. It is known also that even in 
persons Whose memories are not otherwise visual; the earliest infantile memories remain 
vividly visual until late in life.
If, now, We bear in mind the part played in the dream-thoughts by the infantile 
experiences, or by the phantasies based upon them, and recollect how often fragments of 
these reemerge in the dream-content, and how even the dream-wishes often proceed from 
them, we Cannot deny the probability that in dreams, too, the transformation of thoughts 
into visual images may be the result of the attraction exercised by the visually 
represented memory, striving for resuscitation, upon the thoughts severed from the 
consciousness and struggling for expression. Pursuing this conception, we may further 
describe the dream as the substitute for the infantile scene modified by transference to 
recent material. The infantile scene cannot enforce its own revival, and must there fore 
be satisfied to return as a dream. 
This reference to the significance of the infantile scenes (or of their phantastic 
repetitions) as in a certain degree furnishing the pattern for the dream-content renders 
superfluous the assumption made by Schemer and his pupils concerning inner sources of 
stimuli. Schemer assumes a state of visual excitation, of internal excitation in the 
organ of sight, when the dreams manifest a special vividness or an extraordinary 
abundance of visual elements. We need raise no objection to this assumption; we may 
perhaps content ourselves with assuming such a state of excitation only for the psychic 
perceptive system of the organ of Vision; we shall, however, insist that this state of 
excitation is a reanimation by the memory of a former actual visual excitation; I cannot, 
from my own experience, give a good example showing such an influence of an infantile 
memory; my own dreams are altogether less rich in perceptual elements than I imagine 
those of others to be; but in my most beautiful and most vivid dream of late years I can 
easily trace the hallucinatory distinctness of the dream-contents to the visual qualities 
of recently received impressions. On p. 321 I mentioned a dream in which the dark blue of 
the water, the brown of the smoke issuing from the ship-s funnels, and the sombre brown 
and red of the buildings which I saw made a profound and lasting impression upon my mind.
This dream, if any, must be attributed to visual excitation, but what was it that had 
brought my organ of vision into this excitable state? It was a recent impression which 
had joined itself to a series of former impressions. The colours I beheld were in the 
first place those of the toy blocks with which my children had erected a magnificent 
building for my admiration, on the day preceding the dream. There was the sombre red on 
the large blocks, the blue and brown on the small ones. Joined to these were the colour 
impressions of my last journey in, Italy: the beautiful blue of the Isonzo and the 
lagoons, the brown hue of the Alps. The beautiful colours seen in the dream were but 
^repetition of those seen in memory.
Let us summarize what we, have learned about this peculiarity of dreams: their power of 
recasting their idea-content in visual images. We may not have explained this character 
of the dream work by referring it to, the known laws of psychology, but we have singled 
it out appointing to unknown relations, and have given it the name of the regressive 
character, Wherever such regression has occurred, we have regarded it as an effect of the 
resistance which opposes then progress of thought on its normal way to consciousness,-and 
of the simultaneous attraction .exerted upon it by vivid, memories.¹
The regression in dreams is perhaps facilitated by the cessation of the progressive 
stream flowing from the sense-organs during the day; for which auxiliary factor there 
must be some compensation, in. the other forms of regression, by the strengthening of the 
other regressive motives. We must also bear in mind that in pathological: cases of 
regression, just as in dreams, ;the, process of energy transference must be different 
from: that occurring in the regressions of normal psychic life, since it renders possible 
a full hallucinatory cathexis. Of the perceptive system. What we have described in the 
analysis of the dream-work as regard for representability may be referred to the; 
selective-attraction of visually remembered scenes touched by the dream thoughts.
As to the regression, we may further observe that it plays a no less important part in 
the theory of neurotic symptom-formation than in the theory of dreams. We may therefore 
dis
¹In a statement of the theory of repression it should be explained that a thought passes 
into repression owing to the co-operation of two of the factors which  influence it." On 
the one side (the censorship of Cs) it is pushed, and from the other side (the Ucs), it 
is pulled, much as one is helped.to the top of the Great Pyramid. (Compare the paper 
Repression, p. 422 below.)
tinguish a threefold species of regression: (a) a topical one, in the sense of the scheme 
of the ψ-systems here exponded; (b) a temporal' one, in so far as it is a regression to 
older psychic formations; and (c) a formal one, when primitive modes of expression and 
representation take the place of the customary modes. These three forms of regression 
are, however, basically one, and in the majority of cases they coincide, for that which 
is older in point of time is at the same time formally primitive and, in the psychic 
topography, nearer to the perception-end. 
We cannot leave the theme of regression in dreams without giving utterance to an 
impression which has already and repeatedly forced itself upon, us, and which will return 
to us reinforced after a. deeper study of the psycho-neuroses: namely, that dreaming is 
on the whole an act of regression to the earliest relationships of the dreamer, a 
resuscitation of his childhood of the impulses which were then dominant and the modes of 
expression which were, then available. Behind this childhood: of the individual we are 
then promised an insight into the phylogenetic childhood, into the evolution of the human 
race, of which the development of the)individual is only an. abridged repetition 
influenced by, the fortuitous circumstances of We begin to suspect that Friedrich 
Nietzsche was right when he said that in a dream “'there persists a primordial part of 
humanity which we can no longer reach by a direct path," and we are encouraged to expect, 
from the analysis of dreams, a knowledge of the archaic inheritance of man, a knowledge 
of psychical things in him that are innate. It would seem that dreams and neuroses have 
preserved for us more of the psychical antiquities than we suspected; so that 
psycho-analysis may claim a high rank among those sciences which endeavour to reconstruct 
the oldest and darkest phases of the beginnings of mankind. 
It is quite possible that we shall not find this first part of our psychological 
evaluation of dreams particularly satisfying. We must, however, console ourselves with 
the thought that we are, after all, compelled to build put into the dark. If we have not 
gone altogether astray, we shall surely reach approximately the same place from another 
starting-point, and then, perhaps, we shall be better able to find our bearings.
C. The Wish-Fulfilment
The dream of the burning child (cited above) affords us a welcome opportunity for 
appreciating the difficulties confronting the theory of wish-fulfilment. That a dream 
should be nothing but a wish-fulfilment must undoubtedly seem strange to us all-and not 
only because of the contradiction offered by the anxiety-dream. Once our first analyses 
had given us the enlightenment that meaning and psychic value are concealed behind our 
dreams, we could hardly have expected so unitary a determination of this meaning; 
According to the correct but summary definition of; Aristotle, the dream is a 
continuation of thinking in sleep. Now if, during the day, our thoughts perform such a 
diversity of psychic: acts-^judgments, conclusions, the answering of objections, 
expectations, intentions, etc.—why should they be forced at night to confine themselves 
to the. production of wishes only? Are there not, on the contrary, many dreams 
that-present an altogether different psychic act in dream-form for example, anxious 
care-—and is not the father's unusually transparent dream child such a dream? From the 
gleam of light that falls upon his eyes while he is asleep the father draws the 
apprehensive conclusion that a candle has fallen: over and may be burning the body; he 
transforms this conclusion into a dream by embodying it in an obvious situation enacted 
in the present tense, What part is played in this dream by the wish-fulfilment? And how 
can we possibly .mistake the predominance of the thought continued from the waking state 
or evoked by the new sensory impression? 
All these considerations are justified, and force us to look more closely into the role 
of the wish-fulfilment in dreams, and the significance of the waking thoughts continued 
in sleep.
It is precisely the wish-fulfilment that has already caused us to divide all dreams into 
two groups. We have: found dreams which were plainly wish-fulfilments; and others in 
which the wish-fulfilment was unrecognizable and was often concealed by every available 
means. In this latter class of dreams, we recognized the influence of the 
dream-censorship. The undisguised wish-dreams were found chiefly in children; short, 
frank wish-dreams seemed (I purposely emphasize this word) to occur also in adults.
We may now ask whence in each case does the wish that is realized in the dream originate? 
But to what opposition or to what diversity do we relate this whence? I think to the 
opposition between conscious daily life and an un conscious psychic activity which is 
able to make itself perceptible only at night. I thus, find a threefold possibility for 
the origin of a wish, Firstly, it may have been excited during the day, and owing to 
external circumstances may have remained unsatisfied; there is thus left for the night an 
acknowledged and unsatisfied wish, Secondly, it may have emerged during the day, only to 
be rejected; there is thus left for the night an unsatisfied but suppressed wish. 
Thirdly, it may have no relation to daily life, but may belong to those wishes which 
awake only at night out of the suppressed material in us. If we turn to our scheme of the 
psychic apparatus, we can localize a wish of the first order in the system Pes. We may 
assume that a wish of the second order has been forced back from the Pcs system into the 
Ucs system, where alone, if anywhere can it maintain itself as for the wish impulse of 
the third order, We believe that it is wholly incapable of leaving the Ucs system. Now, 
have the wishes arising from these different sources the same: value for the dream, the 
same power to incite a dream?
On surveying the: dreams at our disposal with a view to answering this question,  we are 
at once moved to add as a fourth source of the dream-wish the actual wish-impetus which 
arises during the night (for example, the stimulus of thirst, and sexual desire). It then 
seems to us probable that the source of the dream wish does not affect its: capacity to 
incite a dream. I have in mind the dream of the child who continued the voyage that had 
been interrupted during the day, and the other children's dreams cited in the same 
chapter; they ate explained by an ^unfulfilled but unsuppressed wish of the day time That 
wishes suppressed during the day assert themselves in dream is shown by a great many 
examples; I will mention a very simple dream of this kind. A rather sarcastic lady, whose 
younger friend has be come engaged to be married, is asked, in the daytime by her 
acquaintances whether she knows her friend's fiance, and what she thinks of him. She 
replies with unqualified praise, imposing silence on her own judgment, although she would 
have liked to tell the truth, namely, that he is a commonplace fellow- one meets such by 
the dozen (Dutzendmensch). The following night she dreams that the same question is put 
to her, and that she replies with the formula: "In case of subsequent orders, it will 
suffice to mention the reference number.” Finally, as the result of numerous analyses, 
we learn that the wish in all dreams that have been subject to distortion has its origin 
in the unconscious, and could not become perceptible by day. At first sight, then, it 
seems that in inspect of dream-formation all wishes are of equal value and equal power.
I cannot prove here that this is not really the true state of affairs, but I am strongly 
inclined to assume a stricter determination of the dream-wish. Children's dreams leave us 
in no doubt that a wish unfulfilled during the day may instigate a dream. But we must not 
forget that this is, after all, the wish of a child; that it is a wish-impulse of the 
strength peculiar to childhood. I very much doubt whether a wish unfulfilled in the 
daytime would suffice to create a dream in an adult. It would rather seem that as we 
learn to control our instinctual life by intellection, we more and more renounce as 
unprofitable the formation or retention Of such intense wishes as are natural to 
childhood. In this, indeed, there may be individual variations; sonde retain the 
infantile type of the psychic processes longer than others; just as we find such 
differences in the gradual de cline of the originally vivid visual imagination. In 
general, however, I am of the opinion that unfulfilled wishes of the day are insufficient 
to produce a dream in adults. I will readily admit that the wish-impulses originating in 
conscious ness contribute to the-instigation of dreams, but they probably do no more, The 
dream would not occur if the preconscious wish were not reinforced from another source.
That source is the unconscious. I believe that the conscious wish becomes effective in 
exciting a dream only when it succeeds in arousing a similar unconscious wish which 
reinforces it. From the indications obtained in the psycho analysis of the neuroses, I 
believe that these unconscious wishes are always active and ready to express themselves 
whenever they find an opportunity of allying themselves with an impulse from 
consciousness, and transferring their own greater intensity to the lesser intensity of 
the latter.¹ It must, therefore, seem that the conscious wish alone has been realized in 
the
¹They share this character of indestructibility with all other psychic acts that are 
really unconscious—that is, with psychic acts belonging solely to the system Ucs. These 
paths are opened once and for all; they never fall into disuse; they conduct the 
excitation process to discharge as often as they are charged again with unconscious 
excitation. To speak metaphorically, they suffer no other form, of annihilation than did 
the Shades of the lower regions in the Odyssey, who awoke to new life the moment they 
drank blood. The processes depending on the preconscious system are destructible in quite 
another sense. The psychotherapy of the neuroses is based on this difference.
drearn; but a slight peculiarity in the form of the dream will put us on the track of the 
powerful ally from the Unconscious. These ever-active and, as it were, immortal wishes of 
our unconscious recall the legendary Titans who, from time immemorial, have been buried 
under the mountains which were once hurled upon them by the victorious gods; and even how 
quiver from time to time at the convulsions of their mighty limbs. These wishes, existing 
in repression, are themselves of infantile origin, as we learn from the psychological 
investigation of the neuroses. Let me, therefore^ set aside the view previously 
expressed, that it matters little whence the dream-wish originates, and replace it by 
another, namely: the wish manifested in the dream must be an infantile wish. In the adult 
it originatel4h-theUcs^ while in the child, in whom no division and censorship exist as 
yet between the Pes and Ucs, or in whom these are only in process of formation j it is an 
unfulfilled arid unrepressed wish from the waking state. I am aware that this conception 
cannot be generally demonstrated, but I maintain that it can often be demonstrated even 
where brie would not have suspected it, and that it cannot be generally refuted.
In dream-formation, the wish-impulses which are left over from the conscious waking life 
are, therefore, to be relegated to the background. I cannot admit that they play any part 
except that attributed tb the "material of actual sensations during sleep in relation to 
the dream content. If I now take into account those other psychic instigation left over 
from the waking life of the day, which are not wish es, I shall merely be adhering to the 
course mapped out for me by this line of thought. We may succeed in provisionally 
disposing of the energetic cathexis of our waking thoughts by deciding to go to sleep. He 
is a good sleeper who can do this; Napoleon I is reputed to have been a model of this 
kind. But we do not always succeed in doing it, or in doing it completely. Unsolved 
problems, harassing cares, overwhelming impressions, continue the activity of our thought 
even during sleep, maintaining psychic processes in the system which we have termed the 
preconscious. The thought impulses continued into sleep may be divided in to the 
following groups:
1. Those which have riot been completed during the day, owing to some accidental cause.
2. Those which have been left uncompleted because our mental power have failed us, i.e., 
unsolved problems.
3. Those which have been turned back and suppressed during the day. This is reinforced by 
a powerful fourth group:
4. Those which have been excited in our Ucs during the day by the workings of the Pcs; 
and finally we may add a fifth, consisting of:
5. The indifferent impressions of the day, which have therefore been left unsettled. 
We need not underrate the psychic intensities introduced into sleep by these residues of 
the day's waking life, especially those emanating from the group of the unsolved issues. 
It is certain that these excitations continue to strive for expression during the night, 
and we may assume with equal certainty that the state of sleep renders impossible the 
usual continuance of the process of excitation in the preconscious and its termination in 
becoming conscious. In so far as we can become conscious of our mental processes in the 
ordinary way, even, during:, the night, to that extent we are simply not asleep. I cannot 
say what change is produced in the Pes system by the state of sleep,¹ but there is no 
doubt that the psycho logical characteristics of sleep are to be sought mainly in the 
cathectic changes occurring just in this system, which dominates, moreover, the approach 
to motility, paralysed during sleep. On the other hand, I have found nothing in the 
psychology of dreams to warrant the assumption that sleep produces any but secondary 
changes in the conditions of the Ucs system. Hence, for the nocturnal excitations in the 
Pes there remains no other path than that taken by the wish-excitations from the Ucs; 
they must seek reinforcement from the Ucs, and follow the detours of the unconscious 
excitations. But what is the relation of the preconscious day-residues to the dream? 
There is no doubt that they penetrate abundantly into the dream; that they utilize the 
dream-content to obtrude themselves upon consciousness even during the night; indeed, 
they sometimes even dominate the dream-content, and impel it to continue the work of the 
day; it is also certain that the day-residues may just as well have any other character 
as that of wishes. But it is highly instructive, and for the theory of wish-fulfilment of 
quite decisive importance,
¹I have endeavoured to penetrate farther into the relations of the sleeping state and 
the conditions of hallucination in my essay, "Metapsychological Supplement to the Theory 
of Dreams," Collected Papers, TV, P. 137.
to see what conditions they must comply with in order to be received into the dream.
Let us pick out one of the dreams cited above, e.g., the dream in which my friend Otto 
seems to show the symptoms of Basedow's disease (p. 249). Otto's appearance gave me some 
concern during the day, and this worry, like everything else relating to him, greatly 
affected me. I may assume that this concern followed me into sleep. I was probably bent 
on finding out what was the matter with him. During the night my concern found expression 
in the dream which I have recorded. Not only was its content senseless, but it failed to 
show any wish-fulfilment. But I began to search for the source of this incongruous 
expression of the solicitude felt during the day, and analysis revealed a connection. I 
identified my friend Otto with a certain Baron L and myself with a Professor R. There was 
only one explanation of my being impelled to select just this substitute' for the 
day-thought. I must always have been ready in the Ucs to identify myself with Professor 
R, as this meant, the realization of one of the immortal infantile wishes, viz., the wish 
to become great. Repulsive ideas respecting my friend, ideas that would certainly have 
been repudiated in a waking state, took advantage of the opportunity to creep into the 
dream; but the worry of the day had likewise found some sort of expression by means of a 
substitute in the dream-content. The day thought, which was in itself not a wish, but on 
the contrary a worry, had in some way to find a connection with some infantile wish, now 
unconscious and suppressed, which then allowed it-duly dressed up—to arise for 
consciousness. The more domineering the worry the more forced could be the connection to 
be established; between the content of the wish and that of the worry there need be no 
connection, nor was there one in our example.
It would perhaps be appropriate, in dealing with this problem, to inquire how a dream 
behaves when material.is offered to it in the dream-thoughts which flatly opposes a wish 
fulfilment; such as justified worries, painful reflections and distressing realizations. 
The many possible results may be classified as follows: (a) The dream-work succeeds in 
replacing all painful ideas by contrary ideas, and sup pressing the painful affect 
belonging to them. This, then, results in a pure and simple satisfaction-dream, a 
palpable wish-fulfilment, concerning which there is nothing more to be said, (b) The 
painful ideas find their way into the manifest dream-content; more or less modified, but 
nevertheless quite recognizable; This is the case which raises doubts about the wish 
theory of dreams, arid thus calls for further investigation. Such dreams with a painful 
content may either be indifferent in feeling, or they may convey the whole painful 
affect, which the ideas contained in them seem to justify, or they may even lead to the 
development of anxiety to the point of waking.
Analysis then shows that even these painful dreams are wish-fulfilments. An unconscious 
and repressed wish, whose fulfilment could only be felt as painful by the dreamer's ego, 
has seized the opportunity offered by the continued cathexis of painful day-residues, has 
lent them its support, and has thus made them capable of being dreamed. But whereas in 
case (a) the unconscious wish coincided with the conscious one, in case (b) the discord 
between the unconscious and the conscious- the repressed material and the ego—is 
revealed, and the situation in the fairy-tale, of the three wishes which the fairy offers 
to the married couple, is realized (see p.' 534 below). The gratification in respect of 
the fulfilment of the repressed wish may prove to be so great that it balances the 
painful affects adhering to the day residues; the dream is then indifferent in its 
affective tone, although it is on the one hand the fulfilment of a wish, and on the other 
the fulfilment of a fear. Or it may happen that the sleeper's ego plays an even more 
extensive part in the dream-formation, that it reacts with violent resentment to the 
accomplished satisfaction of the repressed wish, and even goes so far as to make an end 
of the dream by means of anxiety. It is thus not difficult to recognize that dreams of 
pain and anxiety are, in accordance with our theory, just as much wish-fulfilments as are 
the straightforward dreams of gratification.
Painful dreams may also be punishment dreams. It must be admitted that the recognition of 
these dreams adds something that is, in a certain sense, new to the theory of dreams. 
What is fulfilled by them is once more an unconscious wish—the Wish for the punishment 
of the dreamer for a-repressed, prohibited wish impulse. To this extent, these dreams 
comply with the requirement here laid down: that the motive-power behind the 
dream-formation must be furnished by a wish belonging to the unconscious. But a finer 
psychological dissection allows us to recognize the- difference between this and the 
other wish-dreams. In the dreams of group (b) the unconscious dream forming wish belonged 
to the repressed material; In the punishment-dreams it is likewise an unconscious wish, 
but One which we must attribute not to the repressed material but to the ego.
Punishment-dreams point, therefore, to the possibility of a still more extensive 
participation of the ego in dream-formation. The mechanism of dream-formation becomes 
indeed in every way more transparent if in place of the antithesis conscious and 
unconscious, we put the antithesis: ego and repressed. This, however, cannot be done 
without taking into account what happens in the psychoneuroses, and for this reason it 
has not been done in this book. Here I need only remark that the occurrence of 
punishment-dreams is not generally subject to the presence of painful day-residues. They 
originate; indeed, most readily if the contrary is true, if the thoughts which are day 
residues are of a gratifying nature, but express illicit gratifications. Of these 
thoughts nothing, then, finds its way into the manifest dream except their contrary, just 
as was the case in the dreams of group (a). Thus it would be the essential characteristic 
of punishment-dreams that in them it is not the unconscious wish from the repressed 
material (from the system Ucs) that is responsible for dream-formation, but the punitive 
wish reacting against it, a wish pertaining to the ego, even though it is unconscious 
(i.e., preconscious).¹
I will elucidate some of the foregoing observations by means of a dream of my own, and 
above all I will try to show how the dreamwork deals with a day-residue involving painful 
expectation:
Indistinct beginning. I tell my wife I have some news for her, something very special. 
She becomes frightened, and does not wish to hear it. I assure her that on the contrary 
it is something which will please her greatly, and I begin to tell her that our son's 
Officers9 Corps has sent a sum of money (5,000 k.?) ... something about honourable 
mention.. . distribution . . . at the same time I have gone with her into a small room, 
like a store-room, in order to fetch something from it. Suddenly I see my son appear; he 
is not in uniform but rather in a tightfitting sports suit (like, a seal?) with a small 
cap: He climbs on to a basket which stands to one side near a chest. In order to put 
something on this chest. I address him; no answer.
¹Here one may consider the idea of the super-ego which was later recognized by 
psycho-analysis.
It seems to me that his face or forehead is bandaged, he arranges something in his mouth, 
pushing something into it. Also his hair shows a glint of grey. I reflect: Can he be. so 
exhausted? And has he false teeth? Before I can address him again I awake without 
anxiety, but with palpitations. My clock points to 2.30 a.m. 
To give a full analysis is once more impossible. I shall therefore confine myself to 
emphasizing some decisive points. Painful expectations of the day had given occasion for 
this dream; once again there had been no news for over a week from my son, who was 
fighting at the Front It is easy to see that in the dream content the conviction that he 
has been killed or wounded finds expression. At the beginning of the dream one can. 
observe an energetic effort to replace the painful thoughts by their contrary. I have to 
impart something very pleasing, something about sending1 money, honour able mention, and 
distribution. (The sum of money originates in a gratifying incident of my medical 
practice; it is therefore trying to lead the dream away altogether from its theme.) But 
this effort fails. The: boy's mother has a presentiment of something terrible and does 
suit wish to listen. The disguises are too thin; the reference to the material to be 
suppressed shows through everywhere. If my son is killed, then his comrades will send 
back his property; I shall have to distribute whatever he has left among his sisters, 
brothers and others people. Honourable mention is frequently awarded to an officer after 
he has died the "hero's death.” The dream thus strives to give direct expression to 
what it at first wished to deny; whilst at the same time the wish-fulfilling tendency 
reveals itself by distortion. (The change of locality in the dream is no doubt to be 
under stood as threshold symbolism, in line with Silberer's view.) We have indeed no idea 
what lends it the requisite motive-power. But my son does not appear as falling (on the 
field of battle) but climbing.—He was, in fact, a daring mountaineer.-—He is riot in 
uniform, but in a sports suit; that is,- the place of the fatality now dreaded has been 
taken by an accident which happened to him at one time when he was ski-running, when he 
fell and fractured his thigh. But the nature of his costume, which makes him look like a 
seal, recalls immediately a younger person, our comical little grandson; the grey hair 
recalls his father, our son-in-law, who has had a bad time in the Wan What does this 
signify? But let us leave this: the locality, a pantry, the chest, from which he wants to 
take something (in the dream, to put something on it), are unmistakable allusions to. an 
accident of my own, brought upon myself when I was between two and three years of age. I 
climbed on a foot-stool in the pantry, in order to get something nice which was on a 
chest; or table. The footstool tumbled over and its edge struck me behind the lower jaw. 
I might very well have knocked all my teeth out. At this point, an admonition presents 
itself: it serves you right—like a hostile impulse against the valiant warrior. A 
profounder analysis enables me to detect the hidden impulse, which would be able to find 
satisfaction in the dreaded mishap to my son. It is the envy of youth which the elderly 
man believes, that; he has thoroughly stifled in actual life. There is no mistaking the 
fact that it was the very intensity of the painful apprehension! lest such a misfortune 
should really happen that searched out for its alleviation such a repressed 
wish-fulfilment 
I can now clearly define what the unconscious wish means for the dream. I will admit that 
there is a whole class of dreams in which the incitement originates mainly or even 
exclusively from the residues of the day; and returning to  the dream about my friend 
Otto, I believe that even my desire; to become at last a professor extraordinarius would 
have allowed me to sleep in peace that nighty had not the day's concern for my friend's 
health continued active. But this worry1alone would not have produced a dream; the 
motive-power needed by the dream had to be contributed by a wish, and it was the business 
of my concern to find such a wish for itself, as the motive power of the dream. To put it 
figuratively, it is quite possible that a day thought plays the part of the entrepreneur 
in the dream; but the entrepreneur, who, as we say, has the idea, and feels impelled to 
realize it, can do nothing without capital; he needs a capitalist who will defray the 
expense, and this capitalist, who contributes the psychic expenditure for the dream, is 
Invariably arid indisputably, whatever the nature of the waking thoughts, a<wish from, 
the unconscious. 
In other cases the capitalist himself is the entrepreneur; this, indeed, seems to be the 
more usual case. An unconscious wish is excited by the day's work, and this now creates 
the dream. And the dream-processes provide a parallel for all the other possibilities of 
the economic relationship here used as an illustration. Thus the entrepreneur may himself 
contribute a little of the capital, or several entrepreneurs may seek the aid of the same 
capitalist, or several capitalists may jointly supply the capital required by the 
entrepreneurs. Thus there are dreams sustained by more than one dream wish, and many 
similar variations, which may be readily imagined, and which are of no further interest 
to us. What is still lacking to our discussion of the dream-wish we shall only be able to 
complete later on.
The terlium comparationis in the analogies here employed, the quantitative element of 
which an allotted amount is placed at the free disposal of the dream, admits of a still 
closer application to the elucidation of the dream structure. As shown on p. 263, we can 
recognize in most dreams a centre supplied with a special sensory intensity. This is, as 
a rule, the direct representation of the wish-fulfilment; for, if we reverse the 
displacements of the dream-work, we find= that the psychic intensity of the elements in 
the dream-thoughts is replaced by the sensory intensity of the elements in the 
dream-content. The elements in the neighbourhood of the wish-fulfilment have often 
nothing to do with its meaning, but prove to be the offshoots of painful thoughts which 
are opposed to the wish. But owing to their connection with the central element, often 
artificially established, they secure so large a share of its intensity as to become 
capable of representation. Thus, the representative energy of the wish-fulfilment 
diffuses itself over a certain sphere of association, within which all elements are 
raised to representation, including even those that are in themselves without resources. 
In dreams containing several dynamic wishes we can easily separate and delimit the 
spheres of the individual wish-fulfilments, and we shall find that the gaps in the dream 
are often of the nature of boundary-zones.
Although the foregoing remarks have restricted the significance of the day-residues for 
the dream, they are none the less deserving of some further attention. For they must be a 
necessary ingredient in dream-formation, inasmuch as experience reveals the surprising 
fact that every dream shows in its content a connection with a recent waking impression, 
often of the most indifferent kind. So far we have failed to understand the necessity for 
this addition to the dream-mixture (p. 212). This necessity becomes apparent only when we 
bear in mind the part played by the unconscious wish, and seek further information in the 
psychology of the neuroses. We shall then learn that an unconscious idea, as such, is 
quite incapable of entering into the 'preconscious, and that it can exert an influence 
there only by establishing touch with a harmless idea already belonging to the 
preconscious, to which it transfers its intensity, and by which it allows itself to be 
screened. This is the fact of transference, which furnishes the explanation of so many 
surprising occurrences in the psychic life of neurotics. The transference may leave the 
idea from the preconscious unaltered, though the latter will thus acquire an unmerited 
intensity, or it may force upon this some modification derived from the content of the 
transferred idea. I trust the reader will pardon my fondness for comparisons with daily 
life, but I feel tempted to say that the situation for the repressed idea is like that of 
the American dentist in Austria, who may not carry on his practice unless he can get a 
duly installed doctor of medicine to serve him as a signboard and legal "cover." Further, 
just as it is not exactly the busiest physicians who form such alliances with dental 
practitioners, so in the psychic life the choice as regards covers for repressed ideas 
does not fall upon such preconscious or conscious ideas as have themselves attracted 
enough of the attention active in the preconscious. The unconscious prefers to entangle 
with its connections either those impressions and ideas of the preconscious which have 
remained unnoticed as being indifferent or those which have immediately had attention 
withdrawn from them again (by rejection). It is a well-known proposition of the theory of 
associations, confirmed by all experience, that ideas which have formed a very intimate 
connection in one direction assume a negative type of attitude towards whole groups of 
new connections. I have even attempted at one time to base a theory of hysterical 
paralysis on this principle.
If we assume that the same need of transference on the part of the repressed ideas, of 
which we have become aware through the analysis of the neurosis, makes itself felt in 
dreams also, we can at once explain two of the problems of the dream: namely, that every 
dream-analysis reveals an interweaving of a recent impression, and that this recent 
element is often of the most indifferent character. We may add what we have already 
learned elsewhere, that the reason why these recent and indifferent elements so 
frequently find their way into the dream-content as substitutes for the very oldest 
elements of the dream-thoughts is that they have the least to fear from the resisting 
censorship. But while this freedom from censorship explains only the preference shown to 
the trivial elements, the constant presence of recent elements points to the necessity 
for transference. Both groups of impressions satisfy the demand of the repressed ideas 
for material still free from associations, the indifferent ones because they have offered 
no occasion for extensive associations, and the recent ones because they have not had 
sufficient time to form such associations.
We thus see that the day-residues, among which we may now include the indifferent 
impressions, not only borrow something from the Ucs when they secure a share in dream 
formation— namely, the motive-power at the disposal of the repressed wish—but they 
also offer to the unconscious something that is in dispensable to it, namely, the points 
of attachment necessary for transference. If we wished to penetrate more deeply into the 
psychic processes, we should have to throw a clearer light on the play of excitations 
between the preconscious and the unconscious, and indeed the study of the psychoneuroses 
would impel us to do so; but dreams, as it happens, give us no help in this respect.
Just one further remark as to the day-residues. There is no doubt that it is really these 
that disturb our sleep, and not our dreams which, on the contrary, strive to guard our 
sleep. But we shall return to this point later.
So far we have discussed the dream-wish; we have traced it back to the sphere of the Ucs, 
and have analysed its relation to the day residues, which, in their turn, may be either 
wishes, or psychic impulses of any other kind, or simply recent impressions. We have thus 
found room for the claims that can be made for the dream-forming significance of our 
waking mental activity in all its multifariousness. It might even prove possible to 
explain, on the basis of our train of thought, those extreme cases in which the dream, 
continuing the work of the day, brings to a happy issue an unsolved problem of waking 
life. We merely lack a suitable example to analyse, in order to uncover the infantile or 
repressed source of wish es, the tapping of which has so successfully reinforced the 
efforts of the preconscious activity. But we are not a step nearer to answering the 
question: Why is it that the unconscious can furnish in sleep nothing more than the 
motive-power for a wish-fulfilment? The answer to this question must elucidate the 
psychic nature of the state of wishing: and it will be given with the aid of the notion 
of the psychic apparatus.
We do not doubt that this apparatus, too, has only arrived at its present perfection by a 
long process of evolution. Let us attempt to restore it as it existed in an earlier stage 
of capacity. From postulates to be confirmed in other ways, we know that at first the 
apparatus strove to keep itself as free from stimulation as possible, and therefore, in 
its early structure, adopted the arrangement of a reflex apparatus, which enabled it 
promptly to discharge by the motor paths any sensory excitation reaching it from without. 
But this simple function was disturbed by the exigencies of life, to which the apparatus 
owes the impetus toward further development. The exigencies of life first confronted it 
in the form of the great physical needs. The excitation aroused by the inner need seeks 
an outlet in motility, which we may describe as internal change or expression of the 
emotions. The hungry child cries or struggles helplessly. But its situation remains 
unchanged; for the excitation proceeding from the inner need has not the character of a 
momentary impact, but of a continuing pressure. A change can occur only if, in some way 
(in the case of the child by external assistance), there is an experience of 
satisfaction, which puts an end to the internal excitation. An essential constituent of 
this experience is the appearance of a certain percept (of food in our example), the 
memory-image of which is henceforth associated with the memory-trace of the excitation 
arising from the need. Thanks to the established connection, there results, at the next 
occurrence of this need, a psychic impulse which seeks to revive the memory-image of the 
former percept, and to re-evoke the former percept itself; that is, it actually seeks to 
re-establish the situation of the first satisfaction. Such an impulse is what we call a 
wish; the reappearance of the perception constitutes the wish-fulfilment, and the full 
cathexis of the perception, by the excitation springing from the need, constitutes the 
shortest path to the wish-fulfilment. We may assume a primitive state of the psychic 
apparatus in which this path is actually followed, i.e., in which the wish ends in 
hallucination. This first psychic activity therefore aims at an identity of perception : 
that is, at a repetition of that perception which is connected with the satisfaction of 
the need.
This primitive mental activity must have been modified- by bitter practical experience 
into a secondary and more appropriate activity. The establishment of identity of 
perception by the short regressive path within the apparatus does not produce the same 
result in another respect as follows upon cathexis of the same perception coming from 
without. The satisfaction does not occur, and the need continues. In order to make the 
internal cathexis equivalent to the external one, the former would have to be 
continuously sustained, just as actually happens in the hallucinatory psychoses and in 
hunger-phantasies, which exhaust their performance in maintaining their hold on the 
object desired. In order to attain to more appropriate use of the psychic energy, it be 
comes necessary to suspend the full regression, so that it does not proceed beyond the 
memory image, and thence can seek other paths, leading ultimately to the production of 
the desired identity from the side of the outer world.¹ This inhibition, as well as the 
subsequent deflection of the excitation, becomes the task of a second system which 
controls voluntary motility, i.e., a system whose activity first leads on to the use of 
motility for purposes remembered in advance. But all this complicated mental activity, 
which works its way from the memory-image to the production of identity of perception via 
the outer world, merely represents a roundabout way to wish-fulfilment made necessary by 
experience.² Thinking is in deed nothing but a substitute for the hallucinatory wish; 
and if the dream is called a wish fulfilment, this becomes something self-evident, since 
nothing but a wish can impel our psychic apparatus to activity. The dream, which fulfils 
its wishes by following the short regressive path, has thereby simply preserved for us a 
specimen of the primary method of operation of the psychic apparatus, which has been 
abandoned as inappropriate. What once prevailed in the waking state, when our psychic 
life was still young and inefficient, seems to have been banished into our nocturnal 
life; just as we still find in the nursery those discarded primitive weapons of adult 
humanity, the bow and arrow. Dreaming is a fragment of the superseded psychic life of the 
child. In the psychoses,
¹In other words: the introduction of a test of reality is recognized as necessary.
²Le Lorrain justly extols the wish-fulfilments of dreams: "Sans fatigue serieuse, sans 
Stre oblige de recourir a cette lutte opinidtre et longue qui use et corrode les 
jouissances poursuivies" [Without serious fatigue, without being obliged to have recourse 
to that long and stubborn struggle which exhausts and wears away pleasures sought.]

Those modes of operation of the psychic apparatus which are normally suppressed. in :the 
waking state reassert themselves, and there upon betray their inability to satisfy our 
demands in the outer world.³
The unconscious wish-impulses evidently strive to assert themselves even during the day, 
and the fact of transference, as well as the psychoses, tells us that they endeavour to 
force their way through the preconscious system to consciousness and the command of 
motility. Thus, in the censorship between Ucs and Pcs, which the dream forces us to 
assume, we must recognize and respect the guardian of our psychic health. But is it not 
carelessness on the; part of this guardian to diminish his vigilance at night, and to 
allow the suppressed impulses of the Ucs to achieve expression, thus again making 
possible the process of hallucinatory regression? I think not, for when the critical 
guardian goes to rest-^—and we have proof that his slumber is not profound—-he takes 
care to close the gate to motility. No matter what impulses from the usually inhibited 
lies may bustle about the stage, there is no need to interfere with them; they remain 
harmless, because they are not in apposition to set in motion the motor apparatus which 
alone can operate to produce any change in the outer world. Sleep guarantees the security 
of the fortress which has to be guarded. The state of affairs is less harmless when a 
displacement of energies is produced, not by the decline at night in the energy put forth 
by the critical censorship, but by the pathological enfeeblement of the latter, or the 
pathological reinforcement of the unconscious excitations, and this while the 
preconscious is cathected and the gates of motility are open. The guardian is then 
overpowered; the unconscious excitations subdue the Pcs, and from the Pes they dominate 
our speech and action, or they enforce hallucinatory regressions, thus directing an 
apparatus not de signed for them by virtue of the attraction exerted by perceptions on 
the distribution of our psychic energy. We call this condition psychosis. 
We now find ourselves in the most favourable position for continuing the construction of 
our psychological scaffolding, which we left after inserting the two systems, Ucs and Pcs.
³I have further elaborated this train of thought elsewhere, where I have distinguished 
the two principles involved as the pleasure-principle and the reality-principle. 
Formulations regarding the Two Principles in Mental Functioning, in Collected Papers, 
Vol. iv, p. 13.
However, we still have reason to give; further consideration to the wish as the sole 
psychic motive-power in the dream. We have accepted the explanation that the reason why 
the-dream is in every case a wish-fulfilment Us that it is a function of the^ system Ucs, 
which knows no other aim than wish-fulfilment and which has at its disposal no forces 
other than the wish impulses. Now if we want to continue for a single moment longer to 
maintain our tight to develop such far-reaching psychological speculations from the facts 
of dream-interpretation; we are in duty bound to show that they insert the dream into a 
context which can also embrace other psychic structures. If there exists a system of the 
Ucs--or something sufficiently analogous for the purposes of our-discussion- the dream 
cannot be its sole manifestation; every dream may be a wish fulfillment, but there must 
be other forms of abnormal wish fulfilment as well as dreams. Arid in fact the theory of 
all psychoneurotic symptoms culminates in the one proposition that they, too, must be 
conceived ds wish-fulfilments of the unconscious.¹ Our explanation makes the dream only 
the first member of a series of the greatest importance for the psychiatrist, the 
understanding of which means the solution of the purely psychological part of the 
psychiatric problem.² But in other members-of this group of wish-fulfilments—for 
example, in the hysterical symptoms—I know of one essential characteristic which I have 
so far failed to find in the dream. Thus, from the investigations often alluded torn this 
treatise, I  know that the formation of an hysterical symptom needs a junction of both 
the"currents1 of bur psychic life. The symptom is not merely the expression of a realized 
unconscious wish; the latter must be joined by another wish from1 the preconscious, which 
is fulfilled by the same symptom; so that the symptom is at least doubly determined, once 
by each of the conflicting systems. Just as in dreams, there is no limit to further 
over-determination. The determination which does not derive from the Ucs is, as far as I 
can see; invariably a thought-stream of reaction against the unconscious wish; for 
example, a self-punishment. Hence' I can say, quite generally, that an hysterical symptom 
originates
¹Expressed more exactly. One portion of the symptom corresponds to the unconscious 
wish-fulfilment, while the other corresponds to the reaction-formation opposed to it.
²Hughlingst Jackson: has expressed; himself as follows: "Find out all about dreams, and 
you will have found out all about insanity."
	
only where two contrary wish-fulfilments, having their source in different psychic 
systems, are able to meet an a single expression.³ Examples would help us but little 
here, as nothing but a complete unveiling of the complications in question cab carry 
c6nviotion.: I will therefore content myself with the bare assertion, and will cite one 
example, not because it proves anything, but simply as an illustration. The hysterical 
vomiting of a female patient proved, on the one hand, to be the fulfilment of an 
unconscious phantasy from the years of puberty-namely, the wish that she might be 
continually pregnant, and have a multitude of children; arid this was subsequently 
supplemented by the wish that she might have them by as many fathers as possible. 
Against: this immoderate wish there arose a powerful defensive reaction But as by the 
vomiting the patient might have spoilt her figure and her beauty, so that she would no 
longer find favour in any man's eyes, the symptom was also in keeping with the punitive 
trend of thought, arid so, being admissible on both sides, it was allowed to become a 
reality. This is the same way of acceding to a wish-fulfilment as the queen of the 
Parthians was pleased to adopt in the case" of the triumvir Crassus. Believing that he 
had undertaken his campaign out of greed for gold, she caused molten gold to be poured: 
into the throat of the corpse. "Here thou hast what thou hast longed for!"
Of the dream we know as yet only that it expresses a wish-fulfilment of the unconscious; 
and apparently the dominant preconscious system permits this fulfilment when it has 
compelled the wish to undergo certain distortions, We are, moreover, not in fact in a 
position to demonstrate regularly the presence of a train of thought opposed to the 
dream-wish which is realized in the dream as well as its antagonist. Only now and then 
have we found in dream-analyses signs of reaction-products as; for instance, my affection 
for my friend R in the dream of my uncle (p. 195). But the contribution from the 
preconscious which is missing here may be found in another place. The dream can provide 
expression for a-wish from the Ucs by means of all sorts of distortions, Once the 
dominant "system has; withdrawn itself into the wish to sleep, and has realized this wish 
by
³Cf. my latest formulation (in Zeitschrift fur Sexual wissenschaft, Bd. I) of the origin 
of hysterical symptoms in the treatise on “Hysterical Phantasies and then Relation to 
Bisexuality," Collected Papers, II, p. 51. This forms chapter X of Selected Papers on 
Hysteria, p. 115 above.
producing the changes of cathexis within the psychic apparatus which are within its 
power; there upon holding on to the wish in question for the whole duration of sleep.¹
Now this persistent wish to sleep on the part of the preconscious has a quite general 
facilitating effect on the formation of dreams. Let us recall the dream of the father 
who, by the gleam of light from the death-chamber, was led to conclude that his child's 
body might have caught fire. We have shown that one of the psychic forces decisive in 
causing the father to draw this conclusion in the dream instead of allowing himself to be 
awakened by the gleam of light was the wish to prolong the life of the child seen in the 
dream by one moment. Other wishes originating the repressed have probably escaped us, for 
we are. unable to analyse this dream. But as a second source of motive power in this 
dream we may add the fathers desire to sleep, for, like the life of the child, the 
father's sleep is prolonged for a moment by the dream. The underlying motive is: "Let the 
dream go on, or I must wake up." As in this dream, so in all others, the wish to sleep 
lends its support to the unconscious wish. On page 189 we cited dreams which were 
manifestly dreams of convenience. But in truth all dreams may claim this designation. The 
efficacy of the wish to go on sleeping is most easily recognized in the awakening dreams, 
which so elaborate the external sensory stimulus that it becomes compatible with the 
continuance of sleep; they weave it into a dream in order to rob it of any claims it 
might make as a reminder of the outer world. But this wish to go on sleeping must also 
play its part in permitting all other dreams, which can only act as disturbers of the 
state of sleep from within. "Don't worry; sleep on; it's only a dream," is in many cases 
the suggestion of the Pes to consciousness when the dream gets too bad; and this 
describes in a quite general way the attitude of our dominant psychic activity towards 
dreaming, even though the thought remains unuttered. I must draw the conclusion that 
throughout the whole of our sleep we are just-as certain that we are dreaming as we are 
certain that we are sleeping. It is imperative to disregard the objection that our 
consciousness is never directed to the latter knowledge, and that it is directed to the 
former knowledge only on
¹This idea has been borrowed from the theory of sleep of Liebault, who revived hypnotic 
research; in modern times  (Du Sommeil provoqui, etc., Paris [1S89]).
special occasions, when the censorship feels, as it were, taken by surprise, On the 
contrary, there are persons in whom the retention at night of the knowledge that they are 
sleeping and dreaming becomes quite manifest, and who are thus apparently endowed with 
the conscious faculty of guiding their dream-life. Such a dreamer, for example, is 
dissatisfied with the turn taken by a dream; he breaks it off with out waking, and begins 
it afresh, in order to continue it along different lines, just like a popular author who, 
upon request, gives a happier ending to his play. Or on another occasion, when the dream 
places him in a sexually exciting situation, he thinks in his sleep: "I don't want to 
continue this dream and exhaust myself by an emission; X would rather save it fox a real 
situation,"
The Marquis Hervey (Vaschide) declared that he had gained such power over his dreams that 
he could accelerate their course at will, and turn them in any direction he wished. It 
seems that in him the wish to sleep had accorded a place to another, a preconscious wish, 
the wish to observe his dreams and to derive pleasure from them. Sleep is just as 
compatible with such a wish-resolve as it is with some proviso as a condition of waking 
up (wetnurse's sleep), We know, too, that in all per sons an interest in dreams greatly 
increases the number of dreams remembered after waking.
Concerning other observations as to the guidance of dreams, Ferenczi states: "The dream 
takes the thought that happens to occupy our psychic life at the moment, and elaborates 
it from all sides. It lets any given dream-picture drop when there is a danger that the 
wish-fulfilment will miscarry, and attempts a new kind of solution, until it finally 
succeeds in creating a wish-fulfilment that satisfies in one compromise both instances of 
the psychic life."
D. Waking Caused by Dreams. The Function of Dreams. The Anxiety Dream
Now that we know that throughout the night the preconscious Is orientated to the wish to 
sleep, we can follow the dream-process with proper-understanding. But let us first 
summarize what we already know about this process. We have seen that day-residues are 
left over from the waking activity of the mind, residues from which it has not been 
possible to withdraw all cathexis. Either one of the unconscious wishes has been aroused 
through the waking activity during the day or it so happens that the two coincide; we 
have already discussed the multifarious possibilities. Either already during the day or 
only on the establishment of the state of sleep the unconscious wish has made its way to 
the day-residues, and has effected a transference to them. Thus there arises a wish 
transferred to recent material; or the suppressed recent wish is revived by a 
reinforcement from the unconscious. This wish now endeavours to make its way to 
consciousness along the normal path of the thought processes, through the preconscious, 
to which indeed it belongs by virtue of one of its constituent elements. It is, however, 
confronted by the censorship which still subsists, and to whose influence it soon 
succumbs. It now takes on the distortion for which the way has already been paved by the 
transference to recent material. So far it is on the way to becoming something resembling 
an obsession, a delusion, or the like, i.e., a thought reinforced by a transference, and 
distorted in expression owing to the censorship. But its further progress is now checked 
by the state of sleep of the preconscious; this system has presumably protected itself 
against invasion by diminishing its excitations. The dream process, therefore, takes the 
regressive course, which is just opened up by the peculiarity of the sleeping, state, and 
in so doing follows, the attraction exerted on it by memory-groups, which are, in part 
only, themselves present as visual cathexis, not as translations into the symbols of the 
later systems. On its way to regression it acquires representability. The subject of 
compression will be discussed later. The dream-process has by this time covered the 
second part of its contorted course. The first part threads its way progressively from 
the unconscious scenes or phantasies to the preconscious, while the second part struggles 
back from the boundary of the censorship to the tract of the perceptions. But when the 
dream process becomes a perception-content, it has, so to speak, eluded the obstacle set 
up in the Pcs by the censorship and the sleeping state. It succeeds in drawing attention 
to itself, and in being remarked by consciousness. For consciousness, which for us means 
a sense-organ for the apprehension of psychic qualities, can be excited in waking life 
from two sources: firstly, from the periphery of the whole apparatus, the perceptive 
system; and secondly, from the excitations of pleasure and pain which emerge as the sole 
psychic qualities yielded by the transpositions of energy in the interior of the 
apparatus. All other processes in the ^-systems, even those in the preconscious; are 
devoid of all psychic quality, and are there fore not objects of consciousness, inasmuch 
as they do not provide either pleasure or pain for its perception. We shall have to 
assume that these releases of pleasure and pain automatically regulate the course of the 
cathectic processes. But in order to make possible more delicate performances, it 
subsequently proved necessary to render the flow of ideas more in dependent of 
pain-signals. To accomplish this, the Pes system needed qualities of its own which could 
attract consciousness, and most probably received them through the connection of the 
preconscious processes with the  memory system of speech symbols, which was not devoid of 
quality. Through the qualities of this system, consciousness/hitherto only a sense organ 
for perceptions, now becomes also a sense-organ for a part of our thought-processes. 
There are now, as it were, two sensory surfaces, one turned toward perception and the 
other toward the preconscious thought-processes.
I must assume that the sensory surface of consciousness which is turned to the 
preconscious is rendered far more unexcitable by sleep than the surface turned toward the 
P-system. The giving up of interest in the nocturnal thought process is, of course, an 
appropriate procedure. Nothing is to happen in thought; the preconscious wants to sleep. 
But once the dream becomes perception, it is capable of exciting consciousness through 
the qualities now gained. The sensory excitation performs what is in fact its function; 
namely, it directs a part of the cathectic energy available in the Pes to the exciting 
cause in the form of attention. We must therefore admit that the dream always has a 
waking effect—that is, it calls into activity part of the quiescent energy of the Pes. 
Under the influence of this energy, it now undergoes the process which we have described 
as secondary elaboration with a view to coherence and comprehensibility. This means that 
the dream is treated by this energy like any other perception-content; it is subjected to 
the same anticipatory ideas as far, at least, as the material allows. As far as this 
third part of the dream-process has any direction, this is once more progressive.
To avoid misunderstanding, it will not be amiss to say a few words as to the temporal 
characteristics of these dream-processes. In a very interesting discussion, evidently 
suggested by Maury's puzzling guillotine dream, Goblot tries to demonstrate that a dream 
takes up no other time than the transition period between sleeping and waking. The 
process of waking up requires time during this time the dream occurs. It is supposed that 
the final picture of the dream is so vivid that it forces the dreamer to wake; in reality 
it is so vivid only because when it appears the dreamer is already very near waking. 
“Un reve, c’est un reveil qui commence.”¹
It has already been pointed put by Dugas that Goblot in order to generalize his theory, 
was forced to ignore a great many facts.. There are also dreams from which we do not 
awaken; for example, many dreams in which we dream that we dream. From our knowledge of 
the dream-work, we can by-no means admit that it extends only over the period of waking. 
On the contrary, we must-consider it probable that the first part of the dream-work is; 
already begun during: the day, when we are still under the domination of the 
preconscious, The second phase of the dream-work, viz., the alteration by the censorship, 
the attraction exercised by unconscious scenes, and the penetration to, perception, 
continues probably all through, the night, and accordingly we may always be correct when 
we report a feeling that we have been dreaming, all night,, even although we cannot say 
what we have dreamed. I do not, however, think that it is necessary to assume that up. to 
the time of becoming conscious the dream-processes really follow the temporal sequence 
which we have described; viz., that there is first the transferred dream-wish, then the 
process of distortion due to the censorship and then the change of direction to 
regression, etc. We were obliged to construct such a sequence for the sake of 
description; in reality, however, it is probably rather a question of simultaneously 
trying this path and that, and of the excitation fluctuating to and fro, until finally, 
because it has attained the most apposite concentration, one particular grouping remains 
in the field. Certain personal experiences even incline me to believe that the dream-work 
often requires more than one day and one night to produce its result, in which case the 
extra ordinary art manifested in the construction of the dream is shorn of its miraculous 
character. In my opinion, even the regard for the comprehensibility of the dream as a 
perceptual event may exert its influence before the dream attracts consciousness to 
itself. From this point, however, the process is accelerated, since the dream is 
henceforth subjected to the same
¹A dream is the beginning of wakening.-—Ed. 
treatment as any other perception. It is like fire works, which require hours for their 
preparation and then flare-up in a moment.
Through the dream work, the dream process now either gains: sufficient intensity to 
attract consciousness to itself and to arouse-the preconscious (quite independently of 
the time or profundity of sleep), or its intensity-is insufficient, and it must wait in 
readiness until attion, becoming more alert immediately before waking, meets it half-way. 
Most dreams seem to operate with relatively slight psychic intensities, for they wait for 
the process, of waking. This, then; explains the fact that as a rule we perceive 
something dreamed# we are suddenly roused from a deep sleep. Here as well as in 
spontaneous waking, our first glance lights upon the perception-content created by the 
dreamwork, while the next falls on that provided by the outer world. 
But of greater theoretical interest are those dreams which are capable of waking us in 
the midst of our sleep. We. may bear in mind the purposefulness which can be demonstrated 
it all other cases, and ask ourselves why the dream, that is, the unconscious wish, is 
granted the power to disturb our sleep,, i.e., the fulfilment of the preconscious wish. 
The explanation is probably to be found in certain relations of energy which we do not 
yet understand. If we did so, we should probably find that the freedom given to the dream 
and the expenditure upon it of a certain detached attention represent a saving of energy 
as against the alternative case of the unconscious having to be held, in check at night 
just as it is during the day. As experience shows, dreaming, even if it interrupts our 
sleep several times a night, still remains compatible with sleep. We wake up for a 
moment, and immediately fall asleep again. It is like driving off a fly in our sleep; we 
awake ad hoc. When we fall asleep again we have removed the cause of disturbance. The 
familiar examples of the sleep, of wet-nurses, etc., show that the fulfilment of the wish 
to sleep is quite compatible with the maintenance of a certain amount of attention in a 
given direction.
But we must here take note of an objection which is based on a greater knowledge of the 
unconscious processes. We have ourselves described the unconscious wishes as always 
active, whilst nevertheless asserting that in the daytime they are not strong enough to 
make themselves perceptible. But when the state of sleep supervenes, and the unconscious 
wish has shown its power to form a dream, and with it to awaken the preconscious, why 
does this power lapse after cognizance has been taken of the dream? Would it not seem 
more probable that the dream should continually renew itself, like the disturbing fly 
which, when driven away, takes pleasure in returning again and again? What justification 
have we for our assertion that the dream removes the disturbance to sleep?
It is quite true that the unconscious wishes are always active. They represent paths 
which are always practicable, whenever a quantum of excitation makes use of them. It is 
indeed an outstanding peculiarity of the unconscious processes that they are 
indestructible. Nothing can be brought to an end in the unconscious; nothing is past or 
forgotten. This is impressed upon us emphatically in the study of the neuroses, and 
especially of hysteria; The unconscious path of thought which leads to the discharge 
through an attack is forthwith passable again when there is a sufficient accumulation of 
excitation. The mortification suffered thirty years ago operates, after having gained 
access to the unconscious sources of affect, during all these thirty years as though it 
were a recent experience. Whenever its memory is touched it revives, and shows itself to 
be cathected with excitation which procures a motor dis charge for itself in an attack: 
It is precisely here that psychotherapy must intervene, its task being to ensure that the 
unconscious processes are settled and forgotten. Indeed, the fading of memories and the 
weak affect of impressions which are ho longer recent, which we are apt to take as 
self-evident, and to explain as a primary effect of time on our psychic memory-residues, 
are in reality secondary changes brought about by laborious work. It is the preconscious 
that accomplishes this work; and the only course which psychotherapy can pursue is to 
bring the Ucs under the dominion of the Pcs.

54 FREUD: General Introduction, 476a-478b 
That such things should be must seem very strange to you. Perhaps you will be inclined to 
assume; that the indirect counter-will is enough to characterize the incident as 
pathological. But I can assure you that it is also found within the boundaries of health 
and normality. And further, do not misunderstand me; this is in no sense a confession on 
my part that our analytic interpretations are not to be relied on. I have said that 
forgetting to execute a plan may bear many meanings, but this is. so only in those cases 
where no analysis is undertaken and which we have to interpret according to our general 
principles. If an analysis of the person in the case is carried out it can always be 
established with sufficient certainty whether the antipathy is a direct one, or what its 
source is otherwise.
The following is a second point: when we find proof in a large majority of cases that the 
forgetting of an intention proceeds from a counter-will, we gain courage to extend this 
solution to another group of cases in which the person analysed does not confirm, but 
denies, the presence of the counter-will inferred by us: Take as an example of this such 
exceedingly frequent occurrences as forgetting to return borrowed books or to pay bills 
or debts. We will be so bold as to suggest, to the person in question, that there is an 
intention in his mind of keeping the books and not paying the debts, whereupon he will 
deny this intention but will not be able to give us any other explanation of his conduct. 
We then insist that he has this intention but is not aware of it; it is enough for us, 
though, that it betrays itself by the effect of the forgetting. He may then repeat that 
he had merely forgotten about it. You will recognize the situation as one in which we 
have already been placed once before. If we intend to carry through, to their logical 
conclusions, the interpretations of errors which have been proved justified in so many 
cases, we shall be unavoidably impelled to the assumption that tendencies exist in human 
beings which can effect results without their knowing of them. With this, however, we 
place Ourselves in op position to all views prevailing in life and in psychology.
Forgetting proper names, and foreign names and words, can be traced in the same way to a 
counter-tendency aiming either directly or in directly against the name in question. I 
have already given you several examples of such direct antipathy. Indirect causation is 
particularly frequent here and careful analysis is generally required to elucidate it. 
Thus, for instance, in the present time of war which forces us to forego so many of our 
former pleasures, our ability to recall proper names suffers severely by connections of 
the most far-fetched kind.
It happened to me lately to be unable to remember the name of the harmless Moravian town 
of Bisenz; and analysis showed that I was guilty of no direct antagonism in the matter, 
but that the resemblance to the name of the Palazzo Bisenzi in Orvieto, where I had spent 
many happy times in the past, was responsible. As a motive of the tendency opposing the 
recollection of this name, we here for the first time encounter a principle which will 
later on reveal itself to be of quite prodigious importance in the causation of neurotic 
symptoms: namely, the aversion on the part of memory against recalling anything connected 
with painful feelings that would revive the pain if it were recalled. In this tendency 
towards avoidance of pain from recollection or other mental processes, this flight of the 
mind from that which is unpleasant, we may perceive the ultimate purpose at work behind 
not merely the forgetting of names, but also many other errors, omissions, and mistakes.
The forgetting of names seems, however, to be especially facilitated 
psycho-physiologically, and therefore does occur on occasions where the intervention of 
an unpleasantness-motive cannot be established. When anyone has a tendency to forget 
names, it can be confirmed by analytic investigation that names escape, not merely 
because he does not like them or because they remind him of something disagree able, but 
also because the particular name belongs to some other chain of associations of a more 
intimate nature. The name is anchored there, as it were, and is refused to the other 
associations activated at the moment. If you recall the devices of memory systems you 
will realize with some surprise that the same associations which are there artificially 
introduced, in order to save names from being forgotten, are also responsible for their 
being forgotten. The most conspicuous example of this is afforded by proper names of 
persons, which naturally possess quite different values for different people. For 
instance, take a first name, such as Theodore. For some of you it will have no particular 
significance; for others it will be the name of father, brother, friend, or your own 
name. Analytic experience will show you that the former among you will be in no danger of 
forgetting that some stranger bears this name; whereas the latter will be continually 
inclined to grudge to strangers a name which to them seems reserved for an intimate 
relationship. Now let us assume that this inhibition due to associations may coincide 
with the operation of the "pain"-principle, -and in addition with an indirect mechanism; 
you will then be able to form a commensurate idea of the complexity, in causation, of 
such temporary forgetting of names. An adequate analysis that does jus tice to the facts 
will, however, completely dis close all these complications.
The forgetting of impressions and experiences shows the working of the tendency to ward 
off from memory that which is unpleasant much more clearly and invariably than the 
forgetting of names. It does not of course belong in its entirety to the category of 
errors, but only in so far as it appears to us remarkable and unjustified, judged by the 
standard of general experience; as, for instance, where recent or important impressions 
are forgotten, or where one memory is forgotten out of an other wise well-remembered 
sequence. How and why we have the capacity of forgetting in general, particularly how we 
are able to forget experiences which have certainly left the deepest impression on us, 
such as the events of our childhood, is quite a different problem, in which the defence 
against painful associations plays a certain part but is far from explaining everything. 
That unwelcome impressions are easily forgotten is an indubitable fact Various 
psychologists have remarked it; and the great Darwin was so well aware of it that he made 
a golden rule for himself of writing down with particular care observations which seemed 
unfavourable to his theory, having become convinced that just these would be inclined to 
slip out of recollection.
Those who hear for the first time of this principle of defence against unpleasant memory 
by forgetfulness seldom fail to raise the objection that, on the contrary, in their 
experience it is just that which is painful which it is hard to forget, since it always 
comes back to mind to torture the person against his will-as, for example, the 
recollection of grievances or humiliations. This fact is quite correct, but the objection 
is not sound. It is important to begin early to reckon with the fact that the mind is an 
arena, a sort of tumbling-ground, for the struggles of antagonistic impulses; or, to 
express it in non-dynamic terms, that the mind is made up of contradictions and pairs of 
opposites. Evidence of one particular tendency does not in the least preclude its 
opposite; there is room for both of them. The material questions are: How do these 
opposites stand to one another and what effects proceed from one of them and what from 
the other?
Losing and mislaying objects is of especial interest on account of the numerous meanings 
it may have, and the multiplicity of the tendencies in the service of which these errors 
may be employed. What is common to all the cases is the wish to lose something; what 
varies in them is the reason for the wish and the aim of it. One loses something if it 
has become damaged j if one has an impulse to replace it with a better; if one has ceased 
to care for it; if it came from someone with whom unpleasantness has arisen; or if it was 
acquired in circumstances that one no longer wishes to think of. Letting things fall, 
spoiling, or breaking things, serves the same tendency. In social life it is said that 
unwelcome and illegitimate children are found to be far more often weakly than those 
conceived in happier circumstances. This result does not imply that the crude methods of 
the so-called baby-farmers have been employed; some degree of carelessness in the 
supervision of the child should be quite enough. The preservation, or otherwise, of 
objects may well follow the same lines as that of children.
Then too it may happen that a thing will become destined to be lost without its having 
shed any of its value—that is, when there is an impulse to sacrifice something to fate 
in order to avert some other dreaded loss. According to the findings of analysis, such 
conjurings of fate are still very common among us, so that our losses are often voluntary 
sacrifices. Losing may equally well serve the impulses of spite or of self-punishment; in 
short, the more remote forms of motivation behind the impulse to do away with something 
by losing cannot easily be exhausted.
Mistaking of objects, or erroneous performance of actions, like other errors, is often 
made use of to fulfil a wish which should be denied; the intention masquerades as a lucky 
chance. Thus, as once happened to a friend, one has to take a train, most unwillingly, in 
order to pay a visit in the suburbs and then, in changing trains at a connection, gets by 
mistake into one which is returning to town; or, on a journey someone might greatly like 
to make a halt at some stopping-place, which cannot be done owing to fixed engagements 
elsewhere, where upon he mistakes or misses the connection, so that the desired delay is 
forced upon him. Or, as happened to one of my patients whom I had forbidden to telephone 
to the lady he was in love with, he by mistake and thoughtlessly gave the wrong number 
when he meant to telephone to me, so that he was suddenly connected with her, The 
following account by an engineer is a pretty example of the conditions under which damage 
to material objects may be done, and also demonstrates the practical significance of 
directly faulty actions.

54 FREUD: General Introduction, 489c-494d 
In regard to the main issue, however, you are wrong. When you think it arbitrary to 
assume that the first association of the dreamer must give us just what we are looking 
for, or at any rate lead to it, and further, that the as sociation is much more likely to 
be quite capricious and to have no connection with what we are looking for, and that it 
only shows my blind trust in Providence if I expect anything else—then you make a very 
great mistake. I have already taken the liberty of pointing out to you that there is 
within you a deeply rooted belief in psychic freedom and choice, that this belief is 
quite unscientific, and that it must give ground before the claims of a determinism which 
governs even mental life. I ask you to have some respect for the fact that that one 
association, and nothing else, occurs to the dreamer when he is questioned. Nor am I set 
ting up one belief against another. It can be proved that the association thus given is 
not a matter of choice, nor indeterminate, and that it is not unconnected with what we 
are looking for. Indeed, I have recently learnt—not that I attach too much importance 
to the fact—that experimental psychology itself has brought forward similar proofs.
Because of the importance of the matter I ask you to pay special attention to this. When 
I ask a man to say what comes to his mind about any given element in a dream, I require 
him to give himself up to the process of free association which follows when he keeps in 
mind the original idea. This necessitates a peculiar attitude of the attention, something 
quite different from reflection, indeed, precluding it. Many people adopt this attitude 
without any difficulty, but others when they attempt to do so display an incredible 
inaptitude. There is a still higher degree of freedom in association which appears when I 
dispense with any particular stimulus-idea and perhaps only describe the kind and species 
of association that I want; for example, ask someone to let a proper name or a number 
occur to him. An association of this sort should, one would say, be even more subject to 
choice and unaccountable than the kind used in our technique. Nevertheless, it can be 
shown that in every instance it will be strictly determined by important inner attitudes 
of mind, which are unknown to us at the moment when they operate, just as much unknown as 
are the disturbing tendencies which cause errors, and those tendencies which bring about 
so-called "chance" actions.
I myself and many after me have repeatedly made an examination of names and numbers 
called up without any particular idea as a starting-point; some of these experiments have 
been published. The method is this: a train of as sociations is stirred up by the name 
which occurred, and these associations, as you see, are no longer quite free, but are 
attached just so far as the associations to the different elements of the dream are 
attached; this train of associations is then kept up until the thoughts arising from the 
impulse have been exhausted. By that time, however, you will have explained the 
motivation and significance of the free association with a name. The experiments yield 
the same result again and again; the information they give us often includes a wealth of 
material and necessitates going far afield into its ramifications. The associations to 
numbers that arise spontaneously are perhaps the most demonstrative; they follow upon one 
another so swiftly and make for a hidden goal with such astounding certainty that one is 
really quite taken aback. I will give you just One example of a name-analysis of this 
sort, because it happens to be one which does not involve the handling of a great mass of 
material.
Once, when I was treating a young man, I happened to say something on this subject and to 
assert that, in spite of our apparent freedom of choice in such matters, we cannot, in 
point of fact, think of any name which cannot be shown to be narrowly determined by the 
immediate circumstances, the idiosyncrasies, of the person experimented with and his 
situation at the moment. As he was inclined to be sceptical, I proposed that he should 
make the experiment himself then and there. I knew that he had usually numerous 
relationships of all sorts with women and girls, so I told him that I thought he would 
have an exceptionally large number to choose from if he were to let the name of a woman 
occur to him; He agreed; To my surprise, or rather perhaps to his own, he did not 
overwhelm me with.an avalanche of women's names, but remained silent for a time, and then 
confessed that the only name which came into his mind at all was "Albine." "How curious! 
What do you connect with this name? How many Albines do you know?" Strangely enough, he 
knew no one of the name of Albine, and he found no associations to the name. One might 
infer that the analysis had failed; but no, it was already complete, and no further 
association was required. The man himself was unusually fair in colouring, and whilst 
talking to him in analysis I had often jokingly called him an albino; moreover, we were 
just in the midst of tracing the feminine element in his nature. So it was he himself who 
was this female al bino, the woman who interested him most at the moment.
In the same way, the tunes which suddenly come into a man's head can be shown to be 
conditioned by some train of thought to which they belong, and which for some reason is 
occupying his mind without his knowing anything about it. It is easy to show that the 
connection with the tune is to be sought either in the words which belong to it or in the 
source from which it comes: I must, however, make this reservation, that I do not 
maintain this in the case of really musical people of whom I happen to have had no 
experience; in them the musical value of the tune may account for its suddenly emerging 
into consciousness. The first case is certainly much more common; I know of a young man 
who for some time was absolutely haunted by the tune (a charming one, I admit) of the 
song of Paris in Helen of Troy, until his attention was drawn in analysis to the fact 
that at that time an "Ida" and a "Helen" were rivals in his interest. 
If, then, the associations which arise quite freely are determined in this way and belong 
to some definite context, we are surely justified in concluding that associations 
attached to one single stimulus-idea must be equally narrow ly conditioned; Examination 
shows as a fact that they are not only attached in the first place to the stimulus-idea 
which we have provided for them, but that they are also dependent, in the second place, 
on circles of thoughts and interests of strong affective value (complexes, as we call 
them) of whose influence at the time nothing is known, that is to say, on unconscious 
activities.
Associations attached in this way have been made the subject of very instructive 
experiments, which have played a notable part in the history of psycho-analysis. Wundt's 
school originated the so-called association-experiment, in which the subject of the 
experiment is bid den to reply to a given stimulus-word as quickly as possible with 
whatever reaction-word occurs to him. The following points may then be noted: the 
interval which elapses between the utterance of the stimulus-word and of the re 
action-word, the nature of the latter, and possibly any mistake which comes in when the 
same experiment is repeated later, and so on; The Zurich School, under the leadership of 
Bleuler and Jung, arrived at the explanation of the reactions to the 
association-experiment by asking the person experimented upon to throw light upon any 
associations which seemed at all remarkable, by means of subsequent associations. In this 
way it became clear that these unusual reactions were most strictly determined by the 
complexes of the person concerned. By this discovery Bleuler and Jung built the first 
bridge between experimental psychology and psycho-analysis.
Having heard this you may possibly say: "We admit now that free associations are subject 
to determination and not a matter of choice, as we thought at first, and we admit this 
also in the case of associations to the elements of dreams. But it is not this that we 
are bothering about. You maintain that the association to each element in the dream is 
determined by some mental background to this particular element, a background of which we 
know nothing. We cannot see that there is any proof of this: Naturally we expect that the 
as sociation to the dream-element will be shown to be conditioned by one of the complexes 
of the dreamer, but what good is that to us? That does not help us to understand the 
dream; it merely leads to some knowledge of these so called 'complexes,' as did the 
association-experiment; but what have these to do with the dream?"
You are right, but you are overlooking an important point, the very thing which deterred 
me from choosing. the association-experiment as-a starting-point for this discussion. In 
this experiment, the stimulus-word, the single thing which determines the reaction, is 
chosen by us at will, and the reaction stands as intermediary between this stimulus-word 
and the complex aroused in the person experimented upon. In the dream, the stimulus-word 
is replaced by something derived from the mental life of the dreamer, from sources 
unknown to him, and hence may very probably be itself a derivative of a complex. It is 
not, therefore, altogether fantastic to suppose that the further associations connected 
with elements of the dream are determined by no other complex than that which has 
produced the particular element it self, and-that they will lead to the discovery of that 
complex.
Let me give you another instance which may serve to show that, in the case of dreams, the 
facts bear out our expectations. The forgets ting of proper names is really an excellent 
prototype of what happens in dream-analysis, only that in the former case one person 
alone is concerned, while in the interpretation of dreams there are two. When I forget a 
name temporarily, I am still certain that I know it, and by way of a detour through 
Bernheim's experiment, we are now in a position to achieve a similar certainty in the 
case of the dreamer. Now this name which I have forgotten, and yet really know, eludes 
me. Experience soon teaches me that no amount of thinking about it, even with effort, is 
any use. I can, however, always think of another or of several other names instead of the 
forgotten one. When such a substitute name occurs to me spontaneously, only then is the 
similarity between this situation and that of dream-analysis evident. The dream element 
also is not what I am really looking for; it is Only a substitute for something else, for 
the real thing which I do not know and am trying to discover by means of dream-analysis. 
Again the difference is that when I forget a name I know perfectly well that the 
substitute is not the right one, whereas we only arrived at this conception of the 
dream-element by a laborious process of investigation. Now there also is a way in which, 
when we forget a name, we can by starting from the substitute, arrive at the real thing 
eluding our consciousness at the moment, i.e., the forgotten name. If I turn my attention 
to these substitute names and let further associations to them come into my mind, I 
arrive after a short or a long way around at the name I have forgotten, and in so doing I 
discover that the substitutes I have spontaneously produced had a definite connection 
with, and were determined by, the forgotten name.
I will give you an instance of an analysis of this sort: One day I found that I could not 
call to mind the name of the small country on the Riviera, of which Monte Carlo is the 
capital. It was most annoying, but so it was. I delved into all my knowledge about the 
country; I thought of Prince Albert of the House of Lusignan, of his marriages, of his 
passion for deep-sea exploration—in fact of everything I could summon up, but all to no 
purpose. So I gave up trying to think and, instead of the name I had lost, let substitute 
names come in to my mind. They came quickly: Monte Carlo itself, then Piedmont, Albania, 
Montevideo, Colico. Albania was the first to attract my attention; it was immediately 
replaced by Monte negro, probably because of the contrast between black and white. Then I 
noticed that four of the substitute names have the same syllable "mon," and immediately I 
recalled the forgotten word and cried out "Monaco:" You see the substitutes really 
originated in the forgotten name; the four first came from the first syllable and the 
last gave the sequence of the syllables and the whole of the final syllable: 
incidentally, I could quite easily find out what had made me forget the name for the time 
being. Monaco is the Italian name for Munich; and it was some thoughts connected with 
this town which had acted as an inhibition. 
Now that is a very pretty example, but it is too simple. In other cases you might have to 
take a longer succession of associations to the substitute name, and then the analogy to 
dream-analysis would be clearer. I have had experiences of that sort, too. A stranger 
once invited me to drink some Italian wine with him, and in the inn he found he had 
forgotten the name of the wine which he had meant to order on account of his very 
pleasant recollections of it. A number of dissimilar substitute names occurred to him, 
and from these I was able to infer that the thought of someone called Hedwig had made him 
forget the name of the wine. Sure enough, not only did he tell me that there had been a 
Hedwig with him on the occasion when he first tasted the- wine; but this discovery 
brought back to him the name-he wanted. He was now happily married, and Hedwig belonged 
to earlier days which he did not care to recall.
What is possible in the case- of forgotten names must be also possible in the 
interpretation of dreams: starting from the substitute, we must be able to arrive at the 
real object of our search by means of a train of associations; and further, arguing from 
what happens with forgotten names, we may assume that the associations to the 
dream-element' will have been determined not only by that element but also by the real 
thought which is not in consciousness. If we could do this, we should have gone some way 
towards justifying our technique.
SEVENTH LECTURE
Manifest Content and Latent Thoughts You see that our study of errors has not been 
fruitless. Thanks to our exertions in that direction we have—reasoning from the 
hypotheses with which you are familiar—-secured two results: a conception of the nature 
of the dream element and a technique of dream-interpretation. The conception of the 
dream-element is as follows: it is not in itself a primary and essential thing, a thought 
proper, but a substitute for something else unknown to the person concerned, just as is 
the underlying intention of the error, a substitute for something the knowledge of which 
is indeed possessed by the dreamer but is inaccessible to him. We hope to be able to 
carry over the same conception on to the dream as a whole, which consists of a number of 
such elements. Our method is to allow other substitute-ideas, from which we are able to 
divine that which lies hidden, to emerge into consciousness by means of free association 
to the said elements. 
I am now going to propose that we introduce an alteration in our nomenclature in order to 
make our terminology more flexible. Instead of using the words hidden, inaccessible or 
proper, let us give a more precise description and say inaccessible to the consciousness 
of the dreamer or unconscious. By that we mean nothing more than was implied in the case 
of the forgotten word; or the underlying intention responsible for the error; that is to 
Say, unconscious at the moment. It follows that in contradistinction we may call the 
dream-elements themselves, and those substitute-ideas arrived at by the process of 
association, conscious. No theoretical ini^licatidn1is so far contained in these terms; 
no exception can be taken to the use of the word unconscious as a description at once 
applicable and easy to understand.
Now, transferring our conception from the single element to the dream as a whole, it 
follows that the latter is the distorted substitute for something else, something 
unconscious, and that the task of dream-interpretation is to discover these unconscious 
thoughts. Hence are derived three important rules which should be observed in the work of 
dream-interpretation:
1. We are not to trouble about the surface meaning of the dream, whether it be reasonable 
or absurd, clear or confused; in no case does it constitute the unconscious thoughts we 
are seeking. (An obvious limitation of this rule will force itself upon us later.)
2. We are to confine our work to calling up substitute-ideas for every element and not to 
ponder over them and try to see whether they contain something which fits in, nor to 
trouble ourselves about how far they are taking us from the dream-element.
3. We must wait until the hidden unconscious thoughts which we are seeking appear of 
their own accord, just as in the case of the missing word "Monaco" in the experiment 
which I described.
Now we understand also how entirely indifferent it is whether we remember much or little 
of our dreams, above all whether we re member them accurately or not. The dream as 
remembered is not the real thing at all, but a distorted substitute which, by calling up 
other substitute-ideas, provides us with a means of approaching the thought proper, of 
bringing into consciousness the unconscious thoughts underlying the dream. If our 
recollection was at fault, all that has happened is that a further distortion of the 
substitute has taken place, and this distortion itself cannot be without motivation.
We can interpret our own dreams as well as those of others; indeed, we learn more from 
our own and the process carries more conviction. Now if we experiment in this direction, 
we notice that something is working against us. Associations come, it is true, but we do 
not admit them all; we are moved to criticize and to select. We say to ourselves of one 
association: "No, that does not fit in—it is irrelevant," and of another: "That is too 
absurd," and of a third: "That is quite beside the point"; and then we can observe 
further that in making such objections we stifle, and in the end actually banish, the 
associations before they have become quite clear. So on the one hand we tend to hold too 
closely to the initial idea, that is, the dream-element itself, and on the other, by 
allowing ourselves to select, we vitiate the results of the process of free association. 
If we are not attempting the interpretation by ourselves, but are allowing someone else 
to interpret, we shall clearly perceive another motive impelling us to this selection, 
forbidden as we know it to be. We find ourselves thinking at times: "No, this association 
is too unpleasant; I cannot, or will not, tell it to him."
Clearly these objections threaten to spoil the success of our work. We must guard against 
them when we are interpreting our own dreams by resolving firmly not to yield to them, 
and, in interpreting those of someone else, by laying down the hard and fast rule that he 
must not withhold any association, even if one of the four objections I have named rises 
up against it, namely, that it is too unimportant, too absurd, too irrelevant or too 
unpleasant to speak of. He promises to keep this rule, and we may well feel annoyed when 
we find how badly he fulfils his promise later on. At first we account for this by 
imagining that, in spite of our authoritative assurance, he is not convinced that the 
process of free association will be justified by its results; and perhaps our next idea 
will be to win him over first to our theory, by giving him books to read or sending him 
to lectures so that he may be converted to our views on the subject. But we shall be 
saved from any such false steps by observing that the same critical objections against 
certain associations arise even in ourselves, whom we surely cannot suspect of doubt, and 
can only subsequently, on second thoughts as it were, be overcome.
Instead of being annoyed at the dreamer's disobedience, we can turn this experience to 
good account as a means of learning something new, something which is the more important 
the more unprepared we were for it. We realize that the work of dream-interpretation is 
encountering opposition by a resistance which expresses itself in this very form of 
critical objections. This resistance is independent of the theoretical conviction of 
the., dreamer. We learn even more than this. Experience shows that a critical objection 
of this nature is never justified. On the contrary, the associations which people wish to 
suppress in this way prove without exception to be the most important, to be decisive for 
the discovery of the unconscious thought, When an association is accompanied by an 
objection of this sort it positively calls for special notice.
This resistance is something entirely new; a phenomenon which we have found by following 
out our hypotheses, although it was not included in them. We are not altogether 
agree-ably surprised by this new factor which we have to reckon with, for we suspect 
already that it will not make our work any easier: it might almost tempt us to give up 
the effort with dreams altogether. To take such a trivial subject and then to have so 
much trouble, instead of spinning along smoothly with our technique! But we might, on the 
other hand, find these difficulties fascinating and be led to suspect that the work will 
be worth the trouble. Resistances invariably confront us when we try to penetrate to the 
hidden unconscious thought from the substitute offered by the dream-element. We may 
suppose, therefore, that something very significant must be concealed behind the 
substitute; for, if not, why should we meet with such difficulties, the purpose of which 
is to keep up the concealment? When a child will not open his clenched fist to show what 
is in it, we may be quite certain that it is something which he ought not to have.
As soon as we introduce into our subject the dynamic conception of resistance, we must 
bear in mind that this factor is something quantitatively variable. There are greater and 
lesser resistances, and we are prepared to find these differences showing themselves in 
the course of our work. Perhaps we can connect with this another experience also met with 
in the process of dream-interpretation. I mean that sometimes only a few 
associations—perhaps not more than one—suffice to lead us from the dream-element to 
the unconscious thought behind it, whilst on other occasions long chains of associations 
are necessary and many critical objections have to be overcome. We shall probably think 
that the number of associations necessary varies with the varying strength of the 
resistances, and very likely we shall be right. If there is only a slight resistance, the 
substitute is not far removed from the unconscious thought; a strong resistance on the 
other hand causes great distortions of the latter, and there by entails a long journey 
back from the substitute to the unconscious thought itself.
Perhaps this would be a good moment to select a dream and try our technique upon it, to 
see whether the expectations we have entertained are realized. Very well, but what dream 
shall we choose? You do not know how difficult it is for me to decide, nor can I make it 
clear to you yet what the difficulties are. Obviously there must be dreams in which on 
the whole there is very little distortion, and one would think it would be best to begin 
with these. But which are the least distorted dreams? Those which make good sense and are 
not confused, of which I have already given you two examples? In assuming this, we should 
make a great mistake, for examination shows that these dreams have undergone an 
exceptionally high degree of distortion. Supposing, then, that I make no special 
condition but take any dream at random, you would probably be very much disappointed. We 
might have to observe and record such a vast number of associations to the single 
dream-elements that it would be quite impossible to gain any clear view of the work as a 
whole. If we write the dream down and compare with it all the associations which it 
produces, we are likely to find that they have multiplied the length of the text of the 
dream many times. So the most practical method would seem to be that of selecting for 
analysis several short dreams, each of which can at least convey some idea to us or 
confirm some supposition. This will be the course we shall decide to take, unless 
experience gives us a hint where we ought really to look for slightly distorted dreams.
But I can suggest another means of simplifying matters, one which lies right before us. 
Instead of attempting the interpretation of whole dreams, let us confine ourselves to 
single dream-elements and find out by taking a series of examples how the application of 
our technique explains them:
(a) A lady related that as a child she very often dreamt that God had a pointed paper cap 
on his head. How are you going to understand that without the help of the dreamer? It 
sounds quite nonsensical; but the absurdity disappears when the lady says that as a 
little girl she used to have a cap like that put on her head at table, because she 
wouldn't give up looking at the plates of her brothers and sisters to see whether any of 
them had been given more than she. Evidently the cap was meant to serve the purpose of 
blinkers; this piece of historical information was given, by the way, without any 
difficulty. The interpretation of this element and, with it, of the whole short dream 
becomes easy enough with the help of a further association of the dreamer's: "As I had 
been told that God knew everything and saw everything, the dream could only mean that I 
knew and saw everything as God did, even when they tried to prevent me." This example is 
perhaps too simple.

54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 492d-493c 
I am now going to propose that we introduce an alteration in our nomenclature in order to 
make our terminology more flexible. Instead of using the words hidden, inaccessible or 
proper, let us give a more precise description and say inaccessible to the consciousness 
of the dreamer or unconscious. By that we mean nothing more than was implied in the case 
of the forgotten word; or the underlying intention responsible for the error; that is to 
Say, unconscious at the moment. It follows that in contradistinction we may call the 
dream-elements themselves, and those substitute-ideas arrived at by the process of 
association, conscious. No theoretical ini^licatidn1is so far contained in these terms; 
no exception can be taken to the use of the word unconscious as a description at once 
applicable and easy to understand.
Now, transferring our conception from the single element to the dream as a whole, it 
follows that the latter is the distorted substitute for something else, something 
unconscious, and that the task of dream-interpretation is to discover these unconscious 
thoughts. Hence are derived three important rules which should be observed in the work of 
dream-interpretation:
1. We are not to trouble about the surface meaning of the dream, whether it be reasonable 
or absurd, clear or confused; in no case does it constitute the unconscious thoughts we 
are seeking. (An obvious limitation of this rule will force itself upon us later.)
2. We are to confine our work to calling up substitute-ideas for every element and not to 
ponder over them and try to see whether they contain something which fits in, nor to 
trouble ourselves about how far they are taking us from the dream-element.
3. We must wait until the hidden unconscious thoughts which we are seeking appear of 
their own accord, just as in the case of the missing word "Monaco" in the experiment 
which I described.
Now we understand also how entirely indifferent it is whether we remember much or little 
of our dreams, above all whether we re member them accurately or not. The dream as 
remembered is not the real thing at all, but a distorted substitute which, by calling up 
other substitute-ideas, provides us with a means of approaching the thought proper, of 
bringing into consciousness the unconscious thoughts underlying the dream. If our 
recollection was at fault, all that has happened is that a further distortion of the 
substitute has taken place, and this distortion itself cannot be without motivation.
We can interpret our own dreams as well as those of others; indeed, we learn more from 
our own and the process carries more conviction. Now if we experiment in this direction, 
we notice that something is working against us. Associations come, it is true, but we do 
not admit them all; we are moved to criticize and to select. We say to ourselves of one 
association: "No, that does not fit in—it is irrelevant," and of another: "That is too 
absurd," and of a third: "That is quite beside the point"; and then we can observe 
further that in making such objections we stifle, and in the end actually banish, the 
associations before they have become quite clear. So on the one hand we tend to hold too 
closely to the initial idea, that is, the dream-element itself, and on the other, by 
allowing ourselves to select, we vitiate the results of the process of free association. 
If we are not attempting the interpretation by ourselves, but are allowing someone else 
to interpret, we shall clearly perceive another motive impelling us to this selection, 
forbidden as we know it to be. We find ourselves thinking at times: "No, this association 
is too unpleasant; I cannot, or will not, tell it to him."
Clearly these objections threaten to spoil the success of our work. We must guard against 
them when we are interpreting our own dreams by resolving firmly not to yield to them, 
and, in interpreting those of someone else, by laying down the hard and fast rule that he 
must not withhold any association, even if one of the four objections I have named rises 
up against it, namely, that it is too unimportant, too absurd, too irrelevant or too 
unpleasant to speak of. He promises to keep this rule, and we may well feel annoyed when 
we find how badly he fulfils his promise later on. At first we account for this by 
imagining that, in spite of our authoritative assurance, he is not convinced that the 
process of free association will be justified by its results; and perhaps our next idea 
will be to win him over first to our theory, by giving him books to read or sending him 
to lectures so that he may be converted to our views on the subject. But we shall be 
saved from any such false steps by observing that the same critical objections against 
certain associations arise even in ourselves, whom we surely cannot suspect of doubt, and 
can only subsequently, on second thoughts as it were, be overcome.


54 FREUD: General Introduction, 504d-526c 
Our purpose, however, was to find out which are the tendencies exercising the censorship 
and upon which tendencies it is exercised. Now this question, which is fundamental for 
the understanding of dreams and perhaps of human life altogether; is easy to answer when 
we survey the series of dreams which we have succeeded in interpreting. The tendencies 
which exercise the censorship are those which are acknowledged by the waking judgment of 
the dreamer and with which he feels himself to be at one. You may be sure that when you 
repudiate any correctly found interpretation of a dream of your own, you do so from the 
same motives as cause the censorship to be exercised and distortion effected, and make 
interpretation necessary. Consider the dream of our lady of fifty: her dream, although it 
had not been interpreted, struck her as shocking and she would have been even more 
outraged if Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth had told her something of its unmistakable meaning; it 
was just this attitude of condemnation which caused the offensive passages in the dream 
to be replaced by a murmur.
Those tendencies against which the dream censorship is directed must next be described 
from the point of view of this inner critical standard. When we do this, we can only say 
that they are invariably of an objectionable nature, offensive from the ethical, 
aesthetic or social point of view, things about which we do not dare to think at all, or 
think of only with abhorrence. Above all are these censored wishes, which in dreams are 
expressed in a distorted fashion, manifestations of a boundless and ruthless egoism; for 
the dreamer's own ego makes its appearance in every dream, and plays the principal part, 
even if it knows how to disguise itself completely as far as the manifest content is 
concerned. This sacro egoismo of dreams is certainly not unconnected with the attitude of 
mind essential to sleep: the withdrawal of interest from the whole outside world.
The ego which has discarded all ethical bonds feels itself at one with all the demands of 
the sexual impulse, those which have long been condemned by our aesthetic training and 
those which are contrary to all the restraints imposed by morality. The striving for 
pleasure —the libido, as we say—chooses its objects unchecked by any inhibition, 
preferring indeed those which are forbidden: not merely the wife of another man, but, 
above all, the incestuous objects of choice which by common consent humanity holds 
sacred--the mother and the sister of men, the father and the brother of women. (Even the 
dream of our fifty-year-old lady is an incestuous one, the libido being unmistakably 
directed towards the son.) Desires which we believe alien to human nature show themselves 
powerful enough to give rise to dreams. Hate, too, rages unrestrainedly; wishes for 
revenge, and death-wishes, against those who in life are nearest and dearest—parents, 
brothers and sisters, husband or wife, the dreamer's own children—are by no means 
uncommon. These censored wishes seem to rise up from a veritable hell; when we know their 
meaning, it seems to us in our waking moments as if no censorship of them could be severe 
enough. Dreams themselves, however, are not to blame for this evil content; you surely 
have not forgotten that their harmless, nay, useful, function is to protect sleep from 
disturbance. Depravity does not lie in the nature of dreams; in fact, you know that there 
are dreams which can be recognized as gratifying justifiable desires and urgent bodily 
needs. It is true that there is no distortion in these dreams, but then there is no need 
for it, they can perform their function without offending the ethical and aesthetic 
tendencies of the ego. Remember, too, that the degree of distortion is proportion ate to 
two factors: on the one hand, the more shocking the wish that must be censored, the 
greater will be the distortion; but it is also great in proportion as the demands of the 
censorship are severe. Hence in a strictly brought up and prudish young girl, a rigid 
censorship will distort dream-excitations which we medical men would have recognized as 
permissible and harmless libidinous desires, and which the dreamer herself would judge in 
the same way ten years later.
Besides, we are still not nearly far enough advanced to allow ourselves to be outraged at 
the result of our work of interpretation. I think we still do not understand it properly; 
but first of all it is incumbent upon us to secure it against certain possible attacks. 
It is not at all difficult to detect weak points in it. Our interpretations were based on 
hypotheses which we adopted earlier: that there really is some meaning in dreams; that 
the idea of mental processes being unconscious for a time, which was first arrived at 
through hypnotic sleep, may be applied also to normal sleep; and that all associations 
are subject to determination. Now if, reasoning from these hypotheses, we had obtained 
plausible results in our dream interpretation we should have been justified in concluding 
that these hypotheses were correct. But what if these discoveries are of the kind I have 
described? In that case, surely it seems natural to say: "These results are impossibly 
absurd, at the very least highly improbable, so there must have been something wrong 
about the hypotheses. Either the dream is, after all, not a mental phenomenon, or there 
is nothing which is unconscious in our normal condition, or there is a flaw somewhere in 
our technique. Is it not simpler and more satisfactory to assume this than to accept all 
the abominable conclusions which we profess to have deduced from our hypotheses?"
Both! It is both simpler and more satisfactory, but not on that account necessarily more 
correct. Let us give ourselves time: the matter is not yet ripe for judgment. First of 
all, we can make the case against our interpretations even stronger. The fact that our 
results are so unpleasant and repellent would not perhaps weigh so very heavily with us; 
a stronger argument is the emphatic and well-grounded repudiation by dreamers of the 
wish-tendencies which we try to foist upon them after interpreting their dreams. "What," 
says one, "you want to prove to me from my dream that I grudge the money I have spent on 
my sister's dowry and my brother's education? But it is out of the question; I spend my 
whole time working for my brothers and sisters and my only interest in life is to do my 
duty by them, as, being the eldest, I promised our dead mother I would." Or a woman says: 
"I am supposed to wish that my husband were dead? Really that is outrageous nonsense! Not 
only is our married life very happy, though perhaps you won't believe that, but if he 
died I should lose everything I possess in the world." Or someone else will reply: "Do 
you mean to suggest that I entertain sexual desires towards my sister? The thing is 
ludicrous; she is nothing to me; we get on badly with one another, and for years I have 
not exchanged a word with her." We still might not be much impressed if these dreamers 
neither admitted nor denied the tendencies attributed to them; we might say that these 
are just the things of which they are quite unconscious. But when they detect in their 
own minds the exact opposite of such a wish as is interpreted to them, and when they can 
prove to us by their whole conduct in life that the contrary desire predominates, surely 
we must be nonplussed. Is it not about time now for us to discard our whole work of dream 
interpretation as something which has led to a reductio ad absurdum?
No, not even now. Even this stronger argument falls to pieces when subjected to a 
critical attack. Assuming that unconscious tendencies do exist in mental life, the fact 
that the opposite tendencies predominate in conscious life goes to prove nothing. Perhaps 
there is room in the mind for opposite tendencies, for contradictions, existing side by 
side; indeed, possibly the very predominance of the one tendency conditions the 
unconscious nature of the opposite. So the first objections raised only amount to the 
statement that the results of dream-interpretation are not simple and are very 
disagreeable. To the first charge we may reply that, however much enamoured of simplicity 
you may be, you cannot thereby solve one of the problems of dreams; you have to make up 
your mind at the outset to accept the fact of complicated relations. And, as regards the 
second point, you are manifestly wrong in taking the fact that something pleases or re 
pels yourself as the motive for a scientific judgment. What does it matter if you do find 
the results of dream-interpretation unpleasant, or even mortifying and repulsive? Qa 
n'empeche pas d'exister¹—as I, when a young doctor, heard my chief, Charcot, say in a 
similar case. We must be humble and put sympathies and antipathies honourably in the 
background if we would learn to know reality in this world. If a physicist could prove to 
you that organic life on the earth was bound to become extinct before long, would you 
venture to say to him also: "That cannot be so; I dislike the prospect too much." I think 
you would say nothing until another physicist came along and convicted the first of a 
mistake in his premises or his calculations. If you repudiate whatever is distasteful to 
you, you are repeating the mechanism of a dream structure rather than understanding and 
mastering it.
Perhaps, then, you will undertake to overlook the offensive nature of the censored dream 
wishes and will fall back upon the argument that it is surely very improbable that we 
ought to concede so large a part in the human constitution to what is evil. But do your 
own experiences justify you in this statement? I will say nothing of how you may appear 
in your own eyes, but have you met with so much goodwill in your superiors and rivals, so 
much chivalry in your enemies and so little envy amongst your acquaintances, that you 
feel it incumbent on you to protest against the idea of the part played by egoistic 
baseness in human nature? Do you not know how uncontrolled and unreliable the average 
human being is in all that concerns sexual life? Or are you ignorant of the fact that all 
the excesses and- aberrations of which we dream at night are crimes actually committed 
every day by men who are wide
¹It won't kill you.—ED.
awake? What does psycho-analysis do in this connection but confirm the old saying of 
Plato that the good are those who content themselves with dreaming of what others, the 
wicked, actually do?
And now look away from individuals to the great war still devastating Europe: think of 
the colossal brutality, cruelty and mendacity which is now allowed to spread itself over 
the civilized world. Do you really believe that a handful of unprincipled place-hunters 
and corrupters of men would have succeeded in letting loose all this latent evil, if the 
millions of their followers were not also guilty? Will you venture, even in these 
circumstances, to break a lance for the exclusion of evil from the mental constitution of 
humanity?
You will accuse me of taking a one-sided view of war, and tell me that it has also called 
out all that is finest and most noble in mankind, heroism, self-sacrifice, and public 
spirit. That is true; but do not now commit the in justice, from which psycho-analysis 
has so often suffered, of reproaching it that it denies one thing because it affirms 
another. It is no part of our intention to deny the nobility in human nature, nor have we 
ever done anything to disparage its value. On the contrary, I show you not only the evil 
wishes which are censored but also the censorship which suppresses them and makes them 
unrecognizable. We dwell up on the evil in human beings with the greater emphasis only 
because others deny it, thereby making the mental life of mankind not indeed better, but 
incomprehensible. If we give up the one-sided ethical valuation then, we are sure to find 
the truer formula for the relation of evil to good in human nature.
Here the matter rests. We need not give up the results of our work of 
dream-interpretation, even though we cannot fail to find them strange. Perhaps later we 
shall be able to come nearer to understanding them by another path. For the present let 
us hold fast to this: dream distortion is due to the censorship exercised, by certain 
recognized tendencies of the ego, over desires of an offensive character which stir in us 
at night during sleep. Obviously, when we ask ourselves why it is just at night that they 
appear and what is the origin of these reprehensible wishes, we find that there is still 
much to investigate and many questions to answer.
It would, however, be wrong if we neglected to give due prominence at this point to 
another result of these investigations. The dream-wishes which would disturb our sleep 
are unknown to us; we first learn about them by dream-interpretation; they are therefore 
to be designated unconscious at the moment in the sense in which we have used the term. 
But we must recognize that they are also more than unconscious at the moment; for the 
dreamer denies them, as we have so frequently found, even after he has learnt of them 
through the interpretation of his dream. Here we have a repetition of the case which we 
first met with when interpreting the slip of the tongue "hic cough," where the 
after-dinner speaker indignantly assured us that neither then nor at any time had he been 
conscious of any feeling of disrespect towards his chief. We ventured even then to doubt 
the value of this assertion and assumed instead that the speaker was permanently ignorant 
of the existence of this feeling within him. We meet with the same situation every time 
we interpret a dream in which there is a high degree of distortion, and this lends an 
added significance to our conception. We are now prepared to assume that there are 
processes and tendencies in mental life, of which we know nothing; have known nothing; 
have, for a very long time, perhaps even never, known anything about at all. This gives 
the term unconscious a fresh meaning for us: the qualification at the moment or temporary 
is seen to be no essential attribute, the term may also mean permanently unconscious, not 
merely latent at the moment. You see that later on we shall have to discuss this point 
further.
TENTH LECTURE
Symbolism in Dreams
We have found out that the distortion in dreams which hinders our understanding of them 
is due to the activities of a censorship, directed against the unacceptable, unconscious 
wish-impulses. But of course we have not asserted that the censorship is the only factor 
responsible for the distortion, and as a matter of fact a further study of dreams leads 
to the discovery that there are yet other causes contributing to this effect; that is as 
much as to say, if the censorship were eliminated we should nevertheless be unable to 
understand dreams, nor would the manifest dream be identical with the latent 
dream-thoughts.
This other cause of the obscurity of dreams, this additional contribution to distortion, 
is revealed by our becoming aware of a gap in our technique. I have already admitted to 
you that there are occasions when persons being analysed really have no associations to 
single elements in their dreams. To be sure, this does not happen so often as they 
declare that it does; in very many instances the association may yet be elicited by 
perseverance; but still there remain a certain number of cases where association fails 
altogether or, if something is finally extorted, it is not what we need. If this happens 
during psycho-analytic treatment, it has a certain significance which does not concern us 
here; but it also occurs in the course of interpretation of dreams in normal people, or 
when we are interpreting our own. When we are convinced, in such circumstances, that no 
amount of pressing is of any use, we finally discover that this unwelcome contingency 
regularly presents itself where special dream elements are in question; and we begin to 
recognize the operation of some new principle, whereas at first we thought we had only 
come across an exceptional case in which our technique had failed.
In this way it comes about that we try to interpret these silent elements, and attempt to 
translate them by drawing upon our own resources. It cannot fail to strike us that we 
arrive at a satisfactory meaning in every instance in which we venture on this 
substitution, whereas the dream remains meaningless and disconnected as long as we do not 
resolve to use this method. The accumulation of many exactly similar instances then 
affords us the required certainty, our experiment having been tried at first with 
considerable diffidence. I am presenting all this somewhat in outline, but that is surely 
allowable for purposes of instruction, nor is it falsified by so doing, but merely made 
simpler.
We arrive in this way at constant translations for a series of dream-elements, just as in 
popular books on dreams we find such translations for everything that occurs in dreams. 
You will not have forgotten that, when we employ the method of free association, such 
constant substitutions for dream-elements never make their appearance.
Now you will at once say that this mode of interpretation seems to you far more uncertain 
and open to criticism than even the former method of free association. But there is still 
something more to be said: when we have collected from actual experience a sufficient 
number of such constant translations, we eventually realize that we could actually have 
filled in these portions of the interpretation from our own knowledge, and that they 
really could have been understood without using the dreamer's associations. How it is 
that we are bound to know their meaning is a matter which will be dealt with in the 
second half of our discussion. 
We call a constant relation of this kind between a dream-element and its translation a 
symbolic one, and the dream-element itself a symbol of the unconscious dream-thought. You 
will remember that some time ago, when we were examining the different relations which 
may exist between dream-elements and the thoughts proper underlying them, I distinguished 
three relations: substitution of the part for the whole, allusion, and imagery. I told 
you then that there was a fourth possible relation, but I did not tell you what it was. 
This fourth relation is the symbolic, which I am now introducing; there are connected 
with it certain very interesting points for discussion, to which we will turn attention 
before setting forth our special observations on this subject. Symbolism is perhaps the 
most remarkable part of our theory of dreams.
First of all: since the relation between a symbol and the idea symbolized is an 
invariable one, the latter being as it were a translation of the former, symbolism does 
in some measure realize the ideal of both ancient and popular dream-interpretation, one 
from which we have moved very far in our technique. Symbols make it possible for us in 
certain circumstances to interpret a dream without questioning the dreamer, who indeed in 
any case can tell us nothing about the symbols. If the symbols commonly appearing in 
dreams are known, and also the personality of the dreamer, the conditions under which he 
lives, and the impressions in his mind after which his dream occurred, we are often in a 
position to interpret it straightaway; to translate it at sight, as it were. Such a feat 
flatters the vanity of the interpreter and impresses the dreamer; it is in pleasing 
contrast to the laborious method of questioning the latter. But do not let this lead you 
away: it is no part of our task to perform tricks nor is that method of interpretation 
which is based on a knowledge of symbolism one which can replace, or even compare with, 
that of free association. It is complementary to this latter, and the results it yields 
are only useful when applied in connection with the latter. As regards our knowledge of 
the dreamer's mental situation, moreover, you must reflect that you have not only to 
interpret dreams of people whom you know well; that, as a rule, you know nothing of the 
events of the previous day which stimulated the dream; and that the associations of the 
person analysed are the very source from which we obtain our knowledge of what we call 
the mental situation.
Further, it is especially remarkable, particularly with reference to certain 
considerations upon which we shall touch later, that the most strenuous opposition has 
manifested itself again here, over this question of the existence of a symbolic relation 
between the dream and the unconscious. Even persons of judgment and standing, who in 
other respects have gone a long way with psycho-analysis, have renounced their adherence 
at this point. This behaviour is the more remarkable when we remember two things: first, 
that symbolism is not peculiar to dreams, nor exclusively characteristic of them; and, in 
the second place, that the use of symbolism in dreams was not one of the discoveries of 
psycho-analysis, although this science has certainly not been wanting in surprising 
discoveries. If we must ascribe priority in this field to anyone in modern times, the 
discoverer must be recognized in the philosopher K. A. Schemer (1861); psycho-analysis 
has confirmed his discovery, although modifying it in certain important respects.
Now you will wish to hear something about the nature of dream-symbolism and will want 
some examples. I will gladly tell you what I know, but I confess that our knowledge is 
less full than we could wish.
The symbolic relation is essentially that of a comparison, but not any kind of 
comparison. We must suspect that this comparison is subject to particular conditions, 
although we cannot say what these conditions are. Not everything with which an object or 
an occurrence can be compared appears in dreams as symbolic of it, and, on the other 
hand, dreams do not employ symbolism for anything and everything, but only for particular 
elements of latent dream-thoughts; there are thus limitations in both directions. We must 
admit also that we cannot at present assign quite definite limits to our conception of a. 
symbol; for it tends to merge into substitution, representation, etc., and even 
approaches closely to allusion. In one set of symbols the underlying comparison may be 
easily apparent, but there are others in which we have to look about for the common 
factor, the tertium comparation is contained in the supposed comparison. Further 
reflection may then reveal it to us, or on the other hand it may remain definitely hidden 
from us. Again, if the symbol is really a comparison, it is remarkable that this 
comparison is not exposed by the process of free association, and also that the dreamer 
knows nothing about it, but makes use of it unawares; nay, more, that he is actually 
unwilling to recognize it when it is brought to his notice. So you see that the symbolic 
relation is a comparison of a quite peculiar kind, the nature of which is as yet not 
fully clear to us. Perhaps some indication will be found later which will throw some 
light upon this unknown quantity.
The number of things which are represented symbolically in dreams is not great. The human 
body as a whole, parents, children, brothers and sisters, birth, death, nakedness—and 
one thing more. The only typical, that is to say, regularly occurring, representation of 
the human form as a whole is that of a house, as was recognized by Schemer, who even 
wanted to attribute to this symbol an overwhelming significance which is not really due 
to it. People have dreams of climbing down the front of a house, with feelings sometimes 
of pleasure and sometimes of dread. When the walls are quite smooth, the house means a 
man; when there are ledges and balconies which can be caught hold of, a woman. Parents 
appear in dreams as emperor and empress, king and queen or other exalted personages; in 
this respect the dream attitude is highly dutiful. Children and brothers and sisters are 
less tenderly treated, being symbolized by little animals or vermin. Birth is almost 
invariably represented by some reference to water: either we are falling into water or 
clambering out of it, saving someone from it or being saved by them, i.e., the relation 
between mother and child is symbolized. For dying we have setting out upon a journey or 
travelling by train, while the state of death is indicated by various obscure and, as it 
were, timid allusions; clothes and uniforms 5tand for nakedness. You see that here the 
dividing line between the symbolic and the allusive kinds of representation tends to 
disappear. 
In comparison with the poverty of this enumeration, it cannot fail to strike us that 
objects and matters belonging to another range of ideas are represented by a remarkably 
rich symbolism. I am speaking of what pertains to the sexual life—the genitals, sexual 
processes and intercourse. An overwhelming majority of symbols in dreams are sexual 
symbols. A curious disproportion arises thus, for the matters dealt with are few in 
number, whereas the symbols for them are extraordinarily numerous, so that each of these 
few things can be expressed by many symbols practically equivalent. When they are 
interpreted, therefore, the result of this peculiarity gives universal offense, for, in 
contrast to the multifarious forms of its representation in dreams, the interpretation of 
the symbols is very monotonous. This is displeasing to everyone who comes to know of it: 
but how can we help it?
As this is the first time in the course of these lectures that I have touched upon the 
sexual life, I owe you some explanation of the manner in which I propose to treat this 
subject. Psycho analysis sees no occasion for concealments or indirect allusions, and 
does not think it necessary to be ashamed of concerning itself with material so 
important; it is of the opinion that it is right and proper to call everything by its 
true name, hoping in this way the more easily to avoid disturbing suggestions. The fact 
that I am speaking to a mixed audience can make no difference in this. No science can be 
treated in usum delphini, or in a manner adapted to school-girls; the women present, by 
appearing in this lecture-room, have tacitly expressed their desire to be regarded on the 
same footing as the men.
The male genital organ is symbolically represented in dreams in many different ways, with 
most of which the common idea under lying the comparison is easily apparent. In the first 
place, the sacred number three is symbolic of the whole male genitalia. Its more 
conspicuous and, to both sexes, more interesting part, the penis, is symbolized primarily 
by objects which resemble it in form, being long and up standing, such as sticks, 
umbrellas, poles, trees and the like; also by objects which, like the thing symbolized, 
have the property of penetrating, and consequently of injuring, the body, —that is to 
say, pointed weapons of all sorts: knives, daggers, lances, sabres; fire-arms are 
similarly used: guns, pistols and revolvers, these last being a very appropriate symbol 
on account of their shape. In the anxiety-dreams of young girls, pursuit by a man armed 
with a knife or rifle plays a great part. This is perhaps the most frequently occurring 
dream symbol: you can now easily translate it for yourselves. The substitution of the 
male organ by objects from which water flows is again easily comprehensible: taps, 
watering-cans, or springs; and by other objects which are capable of elongation, such as 
pulley lamps, pencils which slide in and out of a sheath, and so on. Pencils, penholders, 
nail-files, hammers and other implements are undoubtedly male sexual symbols, based on an 
idea of the male organ which is equally easily perceived.
The peculiar property of this member of being able to raise itself upright in defiance of 
the law of gravity, part of the phenomenon of erection, leads to symbolic representation 
by means of balloons, aeroplanes, and, just recently, Zeppelins. But dreams have another, 
much more impressive, way of symbolizing erection; they make the organ of sex into the 
essential part of the whole person, so that the dreamer himself flies. Do not be upset by 
hearing that dreams of flying, which we all know and which are often so beautiful, must 
be interpreted as dreams of general sexual excitement, dreams of erection. One 
psycho-analytic investigator, P. Federn, has established the truth of this interpretation 
beyond doubt; but, besides this, Mourly Void, a man highly praised for his sober 
judgment, who carried out the experiments with artificial postures of the arms and legs, 
and whose theories were really widely removed from those of psycho-analysis (indeed he 
may have known nothing about it), was led by his own investigations to the same 
conclusion. Nor must you think to object to this on the ground that women can also have 
dreams of flying; you should rather remind yourselves that the purpose of dreams is 
wish-fulfilment, and that the wish to be a man is frequently met with in women, whether 
they are conscious of it or not. Further, no one familiar with anatomy will be misled by 
supposing that it is impossible for a woman to realize this wish by sensations similar to 
those of a man, for the woman's sexual organs include a small one which resembles the 
penis, and this little organ, the clitoris, does actually play during childhood and in 
the years before sexual intercourse the same part as the large male organ.
Male sexual symbols less easy to understand are certain reptiles and fishes: above all, 
the famous symbol of the serpent. Why hats and cloaks are used in the same way is 
certainly difficult to divine, but their symbolic meaning is quite unquestionable. 
Finally, it may be asked whether the representation of the male organ by some other 
member, such as the hand or the foot, may be termed symbolic. I think the context in 
which this is wont to occur, and the female counterparts with which we meet, force this 
conclusion upon us.
The female genitalia are symbolically represented by all such objects as share with them 
the property of enclosing a space or are capable of acting as receptacles: such as pits, 
hollows and caves, and also jars and bottles, and boxes of all sorts and sizes, chests, 
coffers, pockets, and so forth. Ships too come into this category. Many symbols refer 
rather to the uterus than to the other genital organs: thus cupboards, stoves and, above 
all, rooms. Room symbolism here links up with that of houses, whilst doors and gates 
represent the genital opening. Moreover, material of different kinds is a symbol of 
woman—wood, paper, and objects made of these, such as tables and books. From the animal 
world, snails and mussels at any rate must be cited as unmistakable female symbols; of 
the parts of the body, the mouth as a representation of the genital opening, and, amongst 
buildings, churches and chapels are symbols of a woman. You see that all these symbols 
are not equally easy to understand.
The breasts must be included amongst the organs of sex; these, as well as the larger 
hemispheres of the female body, are represented by apples, peaches and fruit in general. 
The pubic hair in both sexes is indicated in dreams by woods and thickets. The 
complicated topography of the female sexual organs accounts for their often being 
represented by a landscape with rocks, woods and water, whilst the imposing mechanism of 
the male sexual apparatus lends it to symbolization by all kinds of complicated and 
indescribable machinery.
Yet another noteworthy symbol of the female genital organ is a jewel case, whilst jewel 
and treasure are used also in dreams to represent the beloved person,¹ and sweetmeats 
frequently stand for sexual pleasures. Gratification derived from a person's own genitals 
is indicated by any kind of play, including playing the piano. The symbolic 
representation of onanism by sliding or gliding and also by pulling off a branch is very 
typical. A particularly remark able dream-symbol is the falling out or extraction of 
teeth; the primary significance of this is certainly castration as a punishment for 
onanism. Special representations of sexual intercourse are less frequent in dreams than 
we should expect after all this, but we may mention in this connection rhythmical 
activities such as dancing, riding and climbing, and also experiencing some violence, 
e.g., being run over. To these may be added certain manual occupations, and of course 
being threatened with weapons.
You must not imagine that these symbols are either employed or translated quite simply: on
¹Cf. sweetheart, sweetest.—TR.
all sides we meet with what we do not expect. For instance, it seems hardly credible that 
there is often no sharp discrimination of the different sexes in these symbolic 
representations. Many symbols stand for sexual organs in general, whether male or female: 
for in stance, a little child, or a little son or daughter. At another time a symbol 
which is generally a male one may be used to denote the female sexual organ, or vice 
versa. This is incomprehensible until we have acquired some knowledge of the development 
of conceptions about sexuality amongst human beings. In many cases this ambiguity of the 
symbols may be apparent rather than real; and moreover, the most striking amongst them, 
such as weapons, pockets and chests, are never used bisexually in this way.
I will now give a brief account, beginning with the symbols themselves instead of with 
the objects symbolized, to show you from what spheres the sexual symbols have for the 
most part been derived, and I will add a few remarks relating particularly to those in 
which the attribute in common with the thing symbolized is hard to detect. An instance of 
an obscure symbol of this kind is the hat, or per haps head-coverings in general; this 
usually has a masculine significance, though occasionally a feminine one. In the same way 
a cloak be tokens a man, though perhaps sometimes with out special reference to the 
organs of sex. It is open to you to ask why this should be so. A tie, being an object 
which hangs down and is not worn by women is clearly a male symbol, whilst underlinen and 
linen in general stands for the female. Clothes and uniforms, as we have heard, represent 
nakedness or the human form; shoes and slippers symbolize the female genital organs. 
Tables and wood we have mentioned as being puzzling, but nevertheless certain, female 
symbols; the act of mounting ladders, steep places or stairs is indubitably symbolic of 
sexual intercourse. On closer reflection we shall notice that the rhythmic character of 
this climbing is the point in common between the two, and perhaps also the accompanying 
increase in excitation—the shortening of the breath as the climber ascends.
We have already recognized that landscapes represent the female sexual organs; mountains 
and rocks are symbols of the male organ; gardens, a frequently occurring symbol of the 
female genitalia. Fruit stands for the breasts, not for a child. Wild animals denote 
human beings whose senses are excited, and, hence, evil impulses or passions. Blossoms 
and flowers represent the female sexual organs, more particularly, in virginity. In this 
connection you will recollect that the blossoms are really the sexual organs of plants.
We already know how rooms are used symbolically. This representation may be extended, so 
that windows and doors (entrances and exits from rooms) come to mean the openings of the 
body; the fact of rooms being open or closed also accords with this symbolism: the key, 
which opens them, is certainly a male symbol.
This is some material for a study of dream symbolism. It is not complete, and could be 
both extended and made deeper. However, I think it will seem to you more than enough; 
perhaps you may dislike it. You will ask: "Do I then really live in the midst of sexual 
symbols? Are all the objects round me, all the clothes I wear, all the things I handle, 
always sexual symbols and nothing else?" There really is good reason for surprised 
questions, and the first of these would be: How do we profess to arrive at the meaning of 
these dream-symbols, about which the dreamer himself can give us little or no information.
My answer is that we derive our knowledge from widely different sources: from fairy tales 
and myths, jokes and witticisms, from folk lore, i.e., from what we know of the manners 
and customs, sayings and songs, of different peoples, and from poetic and colloquial 
usage of language. Everywhere in these various fields the same symbolism occurs, and in 
many of them we can understand it without being taught anything about it. If we consider 
these various sources individually, we shall find so many parallels to dream-symbolism 
that we are bound to be convinced of the correctness of our interpretations.
The human body is, we said, according to Schemer frequently symbolized in dreams by a 
house; by an extension of this symbolism, windows, doors and gates stand for the 
entrances to cavities in the body, and the facades may either be smooth or may have 
balconies and ledges to hold on to. The same symbolism is met with in colloquialisms; for 
instance, we speak of a thatch of hair, or a tile hat, or say of someone that he is not 
right in the upper storey. In anatomy, too, we speak of the openings of the body as its 
portals.
We may at first find it surprising that parents appear in our dreams as kings and 
emperors and their consorts, but we have a parallel to this in fairy tales. Does it not 
begin to dawn upon us that the many fairy tales which begin with the words "Once upon a 
time there were a king and queen" simply mean: "Once upon a time there were a father and 
mother"? In family life the children are sometimes spoken of jestingly as princes, and 
the eldest son as the crown prince. The king himself is called the father of his people. 
Again, in some parts, little children are often playfully spoken of as little animals, 
e.g., in Cornwall, as little toad, or in Germany as little worm, and, in sympathizing 
with a child, Germans say poor little worm. Now let us return to the house symbolism. 
When in our dreams we make use of the projections of houses as supports, does that not 
suggest a well-known, popular German saying, with reference to a woman with a markedly 
developed bust: "She has something for one to hold on to" (Die hat etwas zum Anhalten), 
whilst another colloquialism in the same connection is: "She has plenty of wood in front 
of her house" (Die hat vied Holz vor dem Hause), as though our interpretation were to be 
borne out by this when we say that wood is a female maternal symbol.
There is still something to be said on the subject of wood. It is not easy to see why 
wood should have come to represent a woman or mother, but here a comparison of different 
languages may be useful to us. The German word Holz (wood) is said to be derived from the 
same root as the Greek ὒλη, which means stuff, raw material. This would be an 
instance of a process which is by no means rare, in that a general name for material has 
come finally to be applied to a particular material only. Now, in the Atlantic Ocean, 
there is an island named Madeira, and this name was given to it by the Portuguese when 
they discovered it, because at that time it was covered with dense forests; for in 
Portuguese the word for wood is madeira. But you cannot fail to notice that this madeira 
is merely a modified form of the Latin materia, which again signifies material in 
general. Now materia is derived from mater— mother, and the material out of which 
anything is made may be conceived of as giving birth to it. So, in the symbolic use of 
wood to represent woman or mother, we have a survival of this old idea.
Birth is regularly expressed by some connection with water: we are plunging into or 
emerging from water, that is to say, we give birth or are being born. Now let us not 
forget that this symbol has a twofold reference to the actual facts of evolution. Not 
only are all land mammals, from which the human race itself has sprung, descended from 
creatures inhabiting the water—this is the more remote of the two considerations—but 
also every single mammal, every human being, has passed the first phase of existence in 
water—that is to say, as an embryo in the amniotic fluid of the mother's womb—and 
thus, at birth, emerged from water. I do not maintain that the dreamer knows this; on the 
other hand, I contend that there is no need for him to know it. He probably knows 
something else from having been told it as a child, but even this, I will maintain, has 
contributed nothing to symbol-formation. The child is told in the nursery that the stork 
brings the babies, but then where does it get them? Out of a pond or a well—again, out 
of the water. One of my patients who had been told this as a child (a little count, as he 
was then) afterwards disappeared for a whole after noon, and was at last found lying at 
the edge of the castle lake, with his little face bent over the clear water, eagerly 
gazing to see whether he could catch sight of the babies at the bottom of the water.
In the myths of the births of heroes, a comparative study of which has been made by O. 
Rank—the earliest is that of King Sargon of Akkad, about 2800 B.C.—exposure in water 
and rescue from it play a major part. Rank perceived that this symbolizes birth in a 
manner analogous to that employed in dreams. When anyone in his dream rescues somebody 
from the water, he makes that person into his mother, or at any rate a mother; and in 
mythology, whoever rescues a child from water confesses herself to be its real mother. 
There is a well-known joke in which an intelligent Jewish boy, when asked who was the 
mother of Moses, answers immediately: "The Princess." He is told: "No, she only took him 
out of the water." "That's what she said," he replies, showing that he had hit upon the 
right interpretation of the myth.
Going away on a journey stands in dreams for dying; similarly, it is the custom in the 
nursery, when a child asks questions as to the whereabouts of someone who has died and 
whom-he misses, to tell him that that person has "gone away." Here again, I deprecate the 
idea that the dream-symbol has its origin in this evasive reply to the child. The poet 
uses the same symbol when he speaks of the other side as "the undiscovered country from 
whose bourne no traveller returns." Again, in everyday speech it is quite usual to speak 
of the "last journey," and everyone who is acquainted with ancient rites knows how 
seriously the idea of a journey into the land of the dead was taken, for instance, in 
ancient Egyptian belief. In many cases the Book of the Dead survives, which was given to 
the mummy, like a Baedeker, to take with him on the last journey. Since burial-grounds 
have been placed at a distance from the houses of the living, the last journey of the 
dead has indeed become a reality.
Nor does sexual symbolism belong only to dreams. You will all know the expression a 
baggage as applied contemptuously to a woman, but perhaps people do not know that they 
are using a genital symbol. In the New Testament we read: "The woman is the weaker 
vessel." The sacred writings of the Jews, the style of which so closely approaches that 
of poetry, are full of expressions symbolic of sex, which have not always been correctly 
interpreted and the exegesis of which, e.g., in the Song of Solomon, has led to many 
misunderstandings.¹ In later Hebrew literature the woman is very frequently represented 
by a house, the door standing for the genital opening; thus a man complains, when he 
finds a woman no longer a virgin, that "he has found the door open." The symbol table for 
a woman also occurs in this literature; the woman says of her husband "I spread the table 
for him, but he overturned it." Lame children are said to owe their infirmity to the fact 
that the man "overturned the table." I quote here from a treatise by L. Levy in Brunn: 
Sexual Symbolism in the Bible and the Talmud.
That ships in dreams signify women is a belief in which we are supported by the 
etymologists, who assert that ship (Schiff) was originally the name of an earthen vessel 
and is the same word as Schaff (a tub or wooden vessel). That an oven stands for a woman 
or the mother's womb is an interpretation confirmed by the Greek story of Periander of 
Corinth and his wife Melissa. According to the version of Herodotus, the tyrant adjured 
the shade of his wife, whom he had loved passionately but had murdered out of jealousy, 
to tell him something about herself, whereupon the dead woman identified herself by 
reminding him that he, Periander, "had put his bread into a cold oven," thus expressing 
in a disguised form a circumstance of which everyone else was ignorant. In the 
Anthropophyteia, edited by F. S. Kraus, a work which is an indispensable textbook on
¹ e. g., Song of Sol. 8. 10.
everything concerning the sexual life of different peoples, we read that in a certain 
part of Germany people say of a woman who is delivered of a child that "her oven has 
fallen to pieces." The kindling of fire and everything connected with this is permeated 
through and through with sexual symbolism, the flame always standing for the male organ, 
and the fire place or the hearth for the womb of the woman. 
If you have chanced to wonder at the frequency with which landscapes are used in dreams 
to symbolize the female sexual organs, you may learn from mythologists how large a part 
has been played in the ideas and cults of ancient times by Mother Earth and how the whole 
conception of agriculture was determined by this symbolism. The fact that in dreams a 
room represents a woman you may be inclined to trace to the German colloquialism by which 
Frauenzimmer (lit. woman's room) is used for Frau, that is to say, the human person is 
represented by the place assigned for her occupation. Similarly we speak of the Porte, 
meaning thereby the Sultan and his government, and the name of the ancient Egyptian 
ruler, Pharaoh, merely means great court. (In the ancient Orient the courts between the 
double gates of the city were places of assembly, like the market place in classical 
times.) But I think this derivation is too superficial, and it strikes me as more 
probable that the room came to symbolize woman on account of its property of enclosing 
within it the human being. We have already met with the house in this sense; from 
mythology and poetry we may take towns, citadels, castles and fortresses to be further 
symbols for women. It would be easy to decide the point by reference to the dreams of 
people who neither speak nor understand German. Of late years I have mainly treated 
foreign patients, and I think I recollect that in their dreams rooms stand in the same 
way for women, even though there is no word analogous to our Frauenzimmer in their 
language. There are other indications that symbolism may transcend the boundaries of 
language, a fact already maintained by the old dream-investigator, Schubert, in 1862. 
Nevertheless, none of my patients were wholly ignorant of German, so that I must leave 
this question to be decided by those analysts who can collect instances in other 
countries from persons who speak only one language.¹
Amongst the symbols for the male sexual organ, there is scarcely one which does not 
appear in jests, or in vulgar or poetic phrases
¹This is certainly so with English patients.—TR.
especially in the old classical poets. Here, how ever, we meet not only with such symbols 
as occur in dreams but also with new ones, e.g., the implements employed in various kinds 
of work, first and foremost, the plough. Moreover, when we come to male symbols, we tread 
on very extensive and much-contested ground which, in order not to waste time, we will 
avoid. I should just like to devote a few remarks to the one symbol which stands, as it 
were, by itself; I refer to the number three. Whether this number does not in all 
probability owe its sacred character to its symbolic significance is a question which we 
must leave undecided, but it seems certain that many tripartite natural objects, e.g., 
the clover-leaf, are used in coats-of-arms and as emblems on account of their symbolism. 
The so-called "French" lily with its three parts and, again, the trisceles, that curious 
coat-of-arms of two such widely separated is lands as Sicily and the Isle of Man (a 
figure consisting of three bent legs projecting from a central point), are supposed to be 
merely disguised forms of the male sexual organ, images of which were believed in ancient 
times to be the most powerful means of warding off evil in fluences (apotropaea); 
connected with this is the fact that the lucky charms of our own time may all be easily 
recognized as genital or sexual symbols. Let us consider a collection of such charms in 
the form of tiny silver pendants: a four-leaved clover, a pig, a mushroom, a horseshoe, a 
ladder and a chimney-sweep. The four leaved clover has taken the place of that with three 
leaves, which was really more appropriate for the purpose of symbolism; the pig is an 
ancient symbol of fruitfulness; the mushroom undoubtedly symbolizes the penis, there are 
mushrooms which derive their name from their unmistakable resemblance to that organ 
(Phallus impudicus); the horseshoe reproduces the contour of the female genital opening; 
while the chimney-sweep with his ladder belongs to this company because his occupation is 
one which is vulgarly compared with sexual intercourse. fCf. Anthropophyteia.) We have 
learnt to recognize his ladder in dreams as a sexual symbol: expressions in language show 
what a completely sexual significance the word steigen (to mount) has, as in the phrases: 
Den Frauen nachsteigen (to run after women) and ein alter Steiger (an old roue). So, in 
French, where the word for step is la marche, we find the quite analogous expression for 
an old rake: un vieux marcheur. Probably the fact that with many of the larger animals 
sexual intercourse necessitates a mounting or climbing upon the female has something to 
do with this association of ideas.
Pulling off a branch to symbolize onanism is not only in agreement with vulgar 
descriptions of that act, but also has far-reaching parallels in mythology. But 
especially remarkable is the representation of onanism, or rather of castration as the 
punishment for onanism, by the falling-out or extraction of teeth; for we find in 
folk-lore a counterpart to this which could, only be known to very few dreamers. I think 
that there can be no doubt that circumcision, a practice common to so many peoples, is an 
equivalent and replacement of castration. And recently we have learnt that certain 
aboriginal tribes in Australia practice circumcision as a rite to mark the attaining of 
puberty (at the celebration of the boy's coming of age), whilst other tribes living quite 
near have substituted for this practice that of knocking out a tooth.
I will end my account with these examples. They are only examples; we know more about 
this subject and you can imagine how much richer and more interesting a collection of 
this sort might be made, not by dilettanti like our selves, but by real experts in 
mythology, anthropology, philology and folk-lore. We are forced to certain conclusions, 
which cannot be exhaustive, but nevertheless will give us plenty to think about.
In the first place, we are confronted with the fact that the dreamer has at his command a 
symbolic mode of expression of which he knows nothing, and does not even recognize, in 
his waking life. This is as amazing as if you made the discovery that your housemaid 
understood Sanscrit, though you know that she was born in a Bohemian village and had 
never learnt that language. It is not easy to bring this fact into line with our views on 
psychology. We can only say that the dreamer's knowledge of symbolism is unconscious and 
belongs to his unconscious mental life, but even this assumption does not help us much. 
Up till now we have only had to assume the existence of unconscious tendencies which are 
temporarily or permanently unknown to us; but now the question is a bigger one and we 
have actually to believe in unconscious knowledge, thought-relations, and comparisons 
between different objects, in virtue of which one idea can constantly be substituted for 
another. These comparisons are not instituted afresh every time, but are ready to hand, 
perfect for all time; this we infer from their identity in different persons, even 
probably in spite of linguistic differences.
Whence is our knowledge of this symbolism derived? The usages of speech cover only a 
small part of it, whilst the manifold parallels in other fields are for the most part 
unknown to the dreamer; we ourselves had to collate them laboriously in the first 
instance.
In the second place, these symbolic relations are not peculiar to the dreamer or to the 
dreamwork by which they are expressed, for we have discovered that the same symbolism is 
employed in myths and fairy tales, in popular sayings and songs, in colloquial speech and 
poetic phantasy. The province of symbolism is extraordinarily wide: dream-symbolism is 
only a small part of it; it would not even be expedient to attack the whole problem from 
the side of dreams. Many of the symbols commonly occurring elsewhere either do not appear 
in dreams at all or appear very seldom; on the other hand, many of the dream-symbols are 
not met with in every other department, but, as you have seen, only here and there. We 
get the impression that here we have to do with an ancient but obsolete mode of 
expression, of which different fragments have survived in different fields, one here 
only, another there only, a third in various spheres perhaps in slightly different forms. 
At this point I am reminded of the phantasy of a very interesting insane patient, who had 
imagined a primordial language (Grundsprache) of which all these symbols were survivals.
In the third place, it must strike you that the symbolism occurring in the other fields I 
have named is by no means confined to sexual themes, whereas in dreams the symbols are 
almost exclusively used to represent sexual objects and relations. This again is hard to 
account for. Are we to suppose that symbols originally of sexual significance were later 
employed differently and that perhaps the decline from symbolic to other modes of 
representation is connected with this? It is obviously impossible to answer these 
questions by dealing only with dream-symbolism; all we can do is to hold fast to the 
supposition that there is a specially close relation between true symbols and sexuality.
An important clue in this connection has recently been given to us in the view expressed 
by a philologist (H. Sperber, of Upsala, who works independently of psycho-analysis), 
that sexual needs have had the largest share in the origin and development of language. 
He says that the first sounds uttered were a means of communication, and of summoning the 
sexual partner, and that, in the later development, the elements of speech were used as 
an accompaniment to the different kinds of work carried on by primitive man. This work 
was performed by associated efforts, to the sound of rhythmically repeated utterances, 
the effect of which was to transfer a sexual interest to the work. Primitive man thus 
made his work agreeable, so to speak, by treating it as the equivalent of and substitute 
for sexual activities. The word uttered during the communal work had therefore two 
meanings, the one referring to the sexual act, the other to the labour which had come to 
be equivalent to it. In time the word was dissociated from its sexual significance and 
its application confined to the work. Generations later the same thing happened to a new 
word with a sexual signification, which was then applied to a new form of work. In this 
way a number of root-words arose which were all of sexual origin but had all lost their 
sexual meaning. If the statement here outlined be correct, a possibility at least of 
understanding dream symbolism opens out before us. We should comprehend why it is that in 
dreams, which retain something of these primitive conditions, there is such an 
extraordinarily large number of sexual symbols; and why weapons and tools in general 
stand for the male, and materials and things worked on for the female. The symbolic 
relations would then be the survival of the old identity in words; things which once had 
the same name as the genitalia could now appear in dreams as symbolizing them.
Further, our parallels to dream-symbolism may assist you to appreciate what it is in 
psycho-analysis which makes it a subject of general interest, in a way that was not 
possible to either psychology or psychiatry; psycho-ana lytic work is so closely 
intertwined with so many other branches of science, the investigation of which gives 
promise of the most valuable conclusions: with mythology, philology, folk-lore, folk 
psychology and the study of religion. You will not be surprised to hear that a 
publication has sprung from psycho-analytic soil, of which the exclusive object is to 
foster these relations. I refer to Imago, first published in 1912 and edited by Hans 
Sachs and Otto Rank. In its relation to all these other subjects, psycho-analysis has in 
the first in stance given rather than received. True, analysis reaps the advantage of 
receiving confirmation of its own results, seemingly so strange, again in other fields; 
but on the whole it is psycho-analysis which supplies the technical methods and the 
points of view, the application of which is to prove fruitful in these other provinces. 
The mental life of the human individual yields, under psycho-analytic investigation, 
explanations which solve many a riddle in the life of the masses of mankind or at any 
rate can show these problems in their true light. 
I have still given you no idea of the circumstances in which we may arrive at the deepest 
insight into that hypothetical primordial language, or of the province in which it is for 
the most part retained. As long as you do not know this you cannot appreciate the true 
significance of the whole subject. I refer to the province of neurosis; the material is 
found in the symptoms and other modes of expression of nervous patients, for the 
explanation and treatment of which psycho-analysis was indeed devised.
My fourth point of view takes us back to the place from which we started and leads into 
the track we have already marked out. We said that even if there were no dream-censorship 
we should still find it difficult to interpret dreams, for we should then be confronted 
with the task of translating the symbolic language of dreams into the language of waking 
fife. Symbolism, then, is a second and independent factor in dream-distortion, existing 
side by side with the censorship. But the conclusion is obvious that it suits the 
censorship to make use of symbolism, in that both serve the same purpose: that of making 
the dream strange and incomprehensible.
Whether a further study of the dream will not introduce us to yet another contributing 
factor in the distortion, we shall soon see. But I must not leave the subject of 
dream-symbolism without once more touching on the puzzling fact that it has succeeded in 
rousing such strenuous opposition amongst educated persons, although the prevalence of 
symbolism in myth, religion, art and language is beyond all doubt. Is it not probable 
that, here again, the reason is to be found in its relation to sexuality?
ELEVENTH LECTURE
The Dream Work
When you have successfully grasped the dream-censorship and symbolic representation, you 
will not, it is true, have mastered dream distortion in its entirety, but you will 
nevertheless be in a position to understand most dreams.
To do so, you will make use of the two complementary methods: you will call up the 
dreamer's associations till you have penetrated from the substitute to the thought proper 
for which it stands, and you will supply the meaning of the symbols from your own 
knowledge of the subject. We will speak later of certain doubtful points which may arise 
in the process. 
We can now return to a task which we at tempted earlier with inadequate equipment, when 
we were studying the relations between dream-elements and the thoughts proper underlying 
them. We then determined the existence of four such main relations: substitution of the 
part for the whole, hints or allusions, symbolic connection, and plastic 
word-representation (images). We will now try to deal with this subject on a larger 
scale, by a comparison of the manifest dream-content as a whole with the latent dream as 
laid bare by our interpretation.
I hope you will never again confuse these two things. If you succeed in distinguishing 
between them, you will have advanced further towards an understanding of dreams than in 
all probability most of the readers of my Interpretation of Dreams have done. Let me 
again remind you that the process by which the latent dream is transformed into the 
manifest dream is called the dream-work; while the reverse process, which seeks to 
progress from the manifest to the latent thoughts, is our work of interpretation; the 
work of interpretation therefore aims at demolishing the dream-work. In dreams of the 
infantile type in which the obvious wish fulfilments are easily recognized, the process 
of dream-work has nevertheless been operative to some extent, for the wish has been trans 
formed into a reality and, usually, the thoughts also into visual images. Here no 
interpretation is necessary; we only have to retrace both these transformations. The 
further operations of the dream-work, as seen in the other types of dreams, we call 
dream-distortion, and here the original ideas have to be restored by our interpretative 
work.
Having had the opportunity of comparing many dream-interpretations, I am in a position to 
give you a comprehensive account of the manner in which the dream-work deals with the 
material of the latent dream-thoughts. But please do not expect to understand too much: 
it is a piece of description which should be listened to quietly and attentively.
The first achievement of the dream-work is condensation; by this term we mean to con vey 
the fact that the content of the manifest dream is less rich than that of the latent 
thoughts, is, as it were, a kind of abbreviated translation of the latter. Now and again 
condensation may be lacking, but it is present as a rule and is often carried to a very 
high degree. It never works in the opposite manner, i.e„ it never happens that the 
manifest dream is wider in range or richer in content than is the latent dream. 
Condensation is accomplished in the following ways: (i) certain latent elements are 
altogether omitted; (2) of many complexes in the latent dream only a fragment passes over 
into the manifest content; (3) latent elements sharing some common characteristic are in 
the manifest dream put together, blended into a single whole.
If you prefer to do so, you can reserve the term "condensation" for this last process, 
the effects of which are particularly easy to demon strate. Taking your own dreams, you 
will be able without any trouble to recall instances of the condensation of different 
persons into a single figure. Sucha composite figure resembles Ain appearance, but is 
dressed like B, pursues some occupation which recalls C, and yet all the time you know 
that it is really D. The composite picture serves, of course, to lay special emphasis 
upon some characteristic common to the four people. And it is possible also for a 
composite picture to be formed with objects or places, as with persons, provided only 
that the single objects or places have some common attribute upon which the latent dream 
lays stress. It is as though a new and fugitive concept were formed, of which the common 
attribute is the kernel. From the superimposing of the separate parts which undergo 
condensation there usually results a blurred and in distinct picture, as if several 
photographs had been taken on the same plate.
The formation of such composite figures must be of great importance in the dream-work, 
for we can prove that the common properties necessary to their formation are purposely; 
manufactured where at first sight they would seem to be lacking, as, for example, by the 
choice of some particular verbal expression for a thought. We have already met with 
instances of condensation and composite-formation of this sort; they played an important 
part in originating many slips of the tongue. You will remember the case of the young man 
who wished to "insort" a lady (beleidigen = "insult," begleiten = "escort," composite 
word begleitdigen). Besides, there are jokes in which the technique is traceable to 
condensation of this sort. Apart from this, however, we may venture to assert that this 
process is something quite unusual and strange. It is true that in many a creation of 
phantasy we meet with counterparts to the formation of the composite persons of our 
dreams, component parts which do not belong to one another in reality being readily 
united into a single whole by phantasy, as, for instance, in the centaurs and fabulous 
animals of ancient mythology or of Boecklin's pictures. Creative phantasy can, in fact, 
invent nothing new, but can only regroup elements from different sources. But the 
peculiar thing about the way in which the dream-work proceeds is this: its material 
consists of thoughts, some of which may be objectionable and dis agreeable, but which 
nevertheless are correctly formed and expressed. The dream-work trans mutes these 
thoughts into another form, and it is curious and incomprehensible that in this process 
of translation—of rendering them, as it were, into another script or language—the 
means of blending and combining are employed. The translator's endeavour in other cases 
must surely be to respect the distinctions observed in the text, and especially to 
differentiate between things which are similar but not the same; the dream-work, on the 
contrary, strives to condense two different thoughts by selecting, after the manner of 
wit, an ambiguous word which can suggest both thoughts. We must not expect to understand 
this characteristic straight away, but it may assume great significance for our 
conception of the dream-work.
Although condensation renders the dream obscure, yet it does not give the impression of 
being an effect of the dream-censorship. Rather we should be inclined to trace it to 
mechanical or economic factors; nevertheless the censorship's interests are served by it.
What condensation can achieve is sometimes quite extraordinary: by this device it is at 
times possible for two completely different latent trains of thought to be united in a 
single manifest dream, so that we arrive at an apparently adequate interpretation of a 
dream and yet overlook a second possible meaning. 
Moreover, one of the effects of condensation upon the relationship between the manifest 
and the latent dream is that the connection between the elements of the one and of the 
other nowhere remains a simple one; for by a kind of interlacing a manifest element 
represents simultaneously several latent ones and, conversely, a latent thought may enter 
into several manifest elements. Again, when we come to interpret dreams, we see that the 
associations to a single manifest element do not commonly make their appearance in 
orderly succession; we often have to wait until we have the interpretation of the whole 
dream.
The dream-work, then, follows a very unusual mode of transcription for the dream 
thoughts; not a translation, word for word, or sign for sign; nor yet a process of 
selection according to some definite rule, for instance, as though the consonants only of 
the words were reproduced and the vowels omitted; nor again what one might call a process 
of representation, one element being always picked out to represent several others. It 
works by a different and much more complicated method.
The second achievement of the dream-work is displacement. Fortunately here we are not 
breaking perfectly fresh ground; indeed, we know that it is entirely the work of the 
dream censorship. Displacement takes two forms; first, a latent element may be replaced, 
not by a part of itself, but by something more remote, some thing of the nature of an 
allusion; and, secondly, the accent may be transferred from an important element to 
another which is unimportant, so that the centre of the dream is shifted as it were, 
giving the dream a foreign appearance.
Substitution by allusion is familiar to us in our waking thoughts also, but with a 
difference; for it is essential in the latter that the allusion should be easily 
comprehensible, and that the content of the substitute should be associated to that of 
the thought proper. Allusion is also frequently employed in wit, where the condition of 
association in content is dispensed with and replaced by unfamiliar external 
associations, such as similarity of sound, ambiguity of meaning, etc. The condition of 
comprehensibility, however, is observed: the joke would lose all its point if we could 
not recognize without any effort what is the actual thing to which the allusion is made. 
But in dreams allusion by displacement is unrestricted by either limitation. It is 
connected most superficially and most remotely with the element for which it stands, and 
for that reason is not readily comprehensible; and, when the connection is traced, the 
interpretation gives the impression of an unsuccessful joke or of a forced, far-fetched 
and dragged in explanation. The object of the dream-censorship is only obtained when it 
has succeeded in making it impossible to trace the thought proper back from the allusion.
Displacement of accent is not a legitimate device, if our object be the expression of 
thought; though we do sometimes admit it in waking life in order to produce a comic 
effect. I can to some extent convey to you the impression of confusion which then 
results, by re minding you of an anecdote, according to which there was in a certain 
village a smith who had committed a capital offence. The court decided that the smith was 
guilty; but, since he was the only one of his trade in the village and therefore 
indispensable, whereas there were three tailors living there, one of these three was 
hanged in his place!
The third achievement of the dream-work is the most interesting from the psychological 
point of view. It consists in the transformation of thoughts into visual images. Let us 
be quite clear that not everything in the dream-thoughts is thus transformed; much keeps 
its original form and appears also in the manifest dream as thought or knowledge, on the 
part of the dreamer; again, translation of them into visual images is not the only 
possible transformation of thoughts. But it is nevertheless the essential feature in the 
formation of dreams, and, as we know, this part of the dream-work is, if we except one 
other case, the least subject to variation; for single dream-elements, moreover, plastic 
word-representation is a process already familiar to us.
Obviously this achievement is by no means an easy one. In order to get some idea of its 
difficulty, imagine that you had undertaken to replace a political leading article in a 
newspaper by a series of illustrations; you would have to abandon alphabetic characters 
in favour of hieroglyphics. The people and concrete objects mentioned in the article 
could be easily represented, perhaps even more satisfactorily, in pictorial form; but you 
would expect to meet with difficulties when you came to the portrayal of all the abstract 
words and all those parts of speech which indicate relations between the various 
thoughts, e.g., particles, conjunctions, and so forth. With the abstract words you would 
employ all manner of devices: for instance, you would try to render the text of the 
article into other words, more unfamiliar perhaps, but made up of parts more concrete and 
therefore more capable of such representation. This will remind you of the fact that most 
abstract words were originally concrete, their original significance having faded; and 
there fore you will fall back on the original concrete meaning of these words wherever 
possible. So you will be glad that you can represent the possessing of an object as a 
literal, physical sitting upon it (possess = potis + sedeo). This is just how the 
dream-work proceeds. In such circumstances you can hardly demand great accuracy of 
representation, neither will you quarrel with the dream-work for replacing an element 
which is difficult to reduce to pictorial form, such as the idea of breaking marriage 
vows, by some other kind of breaking, e.g., that of an arm or leg.1 In this way you will 
to some extent succeed in overcoming the awkwardness of rendering alphabetic characters 
into hieroglyphs.
When you come to represent those parts of speech which indicate thought-relations, e.g., 
because, therefore, but, and so on, you have no such means as those described to assist 
you; so that these parts of the text must be lost, so far as your translation into 
pictorial form is concerned. Similarly, the content of the dream-
¹Whilst correcting these pages, my eye happened to fall upon a newspaper paragraph which 
I reproduce here as affording unexpected confirmation of the above words.
DIVINE RETRIBUTION
A Broken Arm for a Broken Marriage-Vow Frau Anna M, the wife of a soldier in the reserve, 
accused Frau Clementine K of unfaithfulness to her husband. In her accusation she stated 
that Frau K had had an illicit relationship with Karl M during her husband's absence at 
the front, while he was sending her as much as 70 crowns a month. Besides this, she had 
already received a large sum of money from her (Frau M's) husband, while his wife and 
children had to live in hunger and misery. Some of her husband's comrades had informed 
her that he and Frau K had visited public-houses together and remained there drinking 
late into the night. The accused woman had once actually asked the husband of the 
accuser, in the presence of several soldiers, whether he would not soon leave his "old 
woman" and come to her, and the care taker of the house where Frau K lived had repeatedly 
seen the plaintiff's husband in Frau K's room, in a state of complete undress.
Yesterday, before a magistrate in the Leopoldstadt, Frau K denied knowing M at all: any 
intimate relations between them were out of the question, she said. Albertine M, a 
witness, however, gave evidence of having surprised Frau K in the act of kissing the 
accuser's husband.
M, who had been called as a witness in some earlier proceedings, had then denied any 
intimate relations with the accused. Yesterday, a letter was handed to the magistrate, in 
which the witness retracted his former denial and confessed that up to the previous June 
he had carried on illicit relations with Frau K. In the earlier proceedings he had denied 
his relations with the accused only because she had come to him before the action came 
into court and begged him on her knees to save her and say nothing. "To-day," wrote the 
witness, "I feel compelled to lay a full confession before the court, for I have broken 
my left arm and regard this as God's punishment for my offence."
The judge decided that the penal offence had been committed too long ago for the action 
to stand, where upon the accuser withdrew her accusation and the accused was discharged.

thoughts is resolved by the dream-work into its "raw material," consisting of objects and 
activities. You may be satisfied if there is any possibility of indicating somehow, by a 
more minute elaboration of the images, certain relations which cannot be represented in 
them selves. In a precisely similar manner, the dream-work succeeds in expressing much of 
the content of the latent thoughts by means of peculiarities in the form of the manifest 
dream, by its distinctness or obscurity, its division in to various parts, etc. The 
number of parts into which a dream is divided corresponds as a rule with the number of 
its main themes, the successive trains of thought in the latent dream; a short 
preliminary dream often stands in an introductory or casual relation to the subsequent 
detailed main dream; whilst a subordinate dream-thought is represented by the 
interpolation into the manifest dream of a change of scene, and so on. The form of 
dreams, then, is by no means unimportant in itself, and itself demands interpretation. 
Several dreams in the same night often have the same meaning, and indicate an endeavour 
to control more and more completely a stimulus of increasing urgency. In a single dream, 
a specially difficult element may be represented by doubling it, i.e., by more than one 
symbol.
If we continue the comparison of dream thoughts with the manifest dreams representing 
them, we discover in all directions things we should never have expected, e.g., that even 
nonsense and absurdity in dreams have their meaning; in fact, at this point the contrast 
between the medical and the psycho-analytic view of dreams becomes more marked than ever 
before. According to the medical view, the dream is absurd because while dreaming our 
mental activity has renounced its functions; according to our view, on the other hand, 
the dream becomes absurd when it has to represent a criticism implicit in the latent 
thoughts—the opinion: "It is absurd." The dream I told you, about the visit to the 
theatre ("three tickets for one florin and a half") is a good example of this: the 
opinion thus expressed was as follows: "It was absurd to marry so early."
Similarly, we find out when we interpret dreams what is the real meaning of the doubts 
and uncertainties, so frequently mentioned by dreamers, whether a certain element did 
actually appear in the dream, whether it was really this and not rather something else. 
As a rule, there is nothing in the latent thoughts corresponding with these doubts and 
uncertainties; they originate wholly through the operation of the censorship and are 
comparable to a not entirely successful attempt at erasure.
One of our most surprising discoveries is the manner in which opposites in the latent 
dream are dealt with by the dream-work. We know already that points of agreement in the 
latent material are replaced by condensation in the manifest dream. Now contraries are 
treated in just the same way as similarities, with a marked preference for expression by 
means of the same manifest element. An element in the manifest dream which admits of an 
opposite may stand simply for itself, or for its opposite, or for both together; only the 
sense can decide which translation is to be chosen. It accords with this that there is no 
representation of a No in dreams, or at least none which is not ambiguous.
A welcome analogy to this strange behaviour of the dream-work is furnished in the 
development of language. Many philologists have maintained that in the oldest languages 
opposites such as: strong—weak, light—dark, large —small, were expressed by the 
same root word (antithetical sense of primal words). Thus, in old Egyptian ken stood 
originally for both "strong" and "weak." In speaking, misunderstanding was guarded 
against in the use of such ambivalent words by the intonation and accompanying gestures; 
in writing, by the addition of a so-called "determinative," that is to say, of a picture 
which was not meant to be expressed orally. Thus, ken="strong" was written in such a way 
that after the letters there was a picture of a little man standing upright; when ken 
meant "weak," there was added the picture of a man in a slack, crouching attitude. Only 
at a later period did the two opposite meanings of the same primal word come to be 
designated in two different ways by slight modifications of the original. Thus, from ken 
meaning "strong—weak" were derived two words: ken="strong" and kan= "weak." Nor is it 
only the oldest languages, in the last stages of their development, which have retained 
many survivals of these early words capable of meaning either of two opposites, but the 
same is true of much younger languages, even those which are today still living. I will 
quote some illustrations of this taken from the work of C. Abel (1884):
In Latin, such ambivalent words are: altus=high or deep. sacer=sa.cred or accursed. As 
examples of modifications of the original root, I quote:
clamare—to shout, clam=quietly, silently, secretly.
siccus=dry. succus=juice.
and, in German: Stimme=voice, stumm=dumb.
A comparison of kindred languages yields a large number of examples:
English: lock=to shut. German: Loch=hole.
Lucke = gap.
English: cleave.¹ German: kleben=to stick,
adhere.
The English word "without," originally carrying with it both a positive and a negative 
connotation, is today used in the negative sense only, but it is clear that "with" has 
the signification, not merely of "adding to," but of "depriving of," from the compounds 
"with draw," "withhold" (cf. the German wieder).
Yet another peculiarity of the dream-work has its counterpart in the development of 
language. In ancient Egyptian, as well as in other later languages, the sequence of 
sounds was transposed so as to result in different words for the same fundamental idea. 
Examples of this kind of parallels between English and German words may be quoted:
Topf (pot)—pot. Boat—tub. Hurry—Ruhe
(rest).
Balken (beam)—Kloben (club), wait—t'duwen
(to wait).
Parallels between Latin and German:
capere—packen (to seize), ren—Niere (kidney). 
Such transpositions as have taken place here in the case of single words are made by the 
dream-work in a variety of ways. The inversion of the meaning, i.e., substitution by the 
opposite, is a device with which we are already familiar; but, besides this, we find in 
dreams inversion of situations or of the relations existing be tween two persons, as 
though the scene were laid in a "topsy-turvy" world. In dreams often enough the hare 
chases the hunter. Again, in version is met with in the sequence of events, so that in 
dreams cause follows effect, which reminds us of what sometimes happens in a third-rate 
theatrical performance, when first the hero falls and then the shot which kills him is 
fired from the wings. Or there are dreams in which the whole arrangement of the elements 
is inverted, so that in interpreting them the
¹Both senses of cleave are still alive in English: to cleave (= separate) and to cleave 
to (= adhere).— TR.
last must be taken first, and the first last, in order to make sense at all. You remember 
that we also found this in our study of dream-symbolism, in which the act of plunging or 
falling into water has the same meaning as that of emerging from water, namely, giving 
birth or being born and going up steps or a ladder means the same as coming down them. We 
can not fail to recognize the advantage reaped for dream-distortion by this freedom from 
restrictions in representing the dream-thoughts. 
These features of the dream-work may be termed archaic. They cling to the primitive modes 
of expression of languages or scripts, and yield the same difficulties, which we shall 
touch upon later in the course of some critical observations on this topic.
Now let us consider some other aspects of the subject. Clearly what has to be 
accomplished by the dream-work is the transformation of the latent thoughts, as expressed 
in words, into perceptual forms, most commonly into visual images. Now our thoughts 
originated in such perceptual forms; their earliest material and the first stages in 
their development consisted of sense-impressions, or more accurately, of memory-pictures 
of these. It was later that words were attached to these pictures and then connected so 
as to form thoughts. So that the dream-work subjects our thoughts to a regressive process 
and retraces the steps in their development; in the course of this regression all new 
acquisitions won during this development of memory-pictures into thoughts must 
necessarily fall away.
This then is what we mean by the dream work. Besides, what we have learnt of its 
processes our interest in the manifest dream is bound to recede far into the background; 
I will, however, devote still a few more remarks to the manifest dream, for, after all, 
that is the only part of the dream with which we have any direct acquaintance.
It is natural that the manifest dream should lose some of its importance in our eyes. It 
must strike us as a matter of indifference whether it is carefully composed or split up 
into a succession of disconnected pictures. Even when the outward form of the dream is 
apparently full of meaning, we know that this appearance has been arrived at by the 
process of dream-distortion, and can have as little organic connection with the inner 
content of the dream as exists between the facade of an Italian church and its general 
structure and ground-plan. At times, however, this facade of the dream has a meaning too, 
reproducing an important part of the latent thoughts with little or no distortion. But we 
cannot know this until we have interpreted the dream and thus arrived at an opinion with 
regard to the degree of distortion present. A similar doubt obtains where two elements 
seem to be closely connected; such connection may contain a valuable hint that the 
corresponding elements in the latent dream are similarly related, but at other times we 
can convince ourselves that what is connected in thought has become widely separated in 
the dream.
In general we must refrain from attempting to explain one part of the manifest dream by 
another part, as though the dream were a coherent conception and a pragmatic 
representation. It is in most cases comparable rather to a piece of Breccia stone, 
composed of fragments of different kinds of stone cemented together in such a way that 
the markings upon it are not those of the original pieces contained in it. There is, as a 
matter of fact, one mechanism in the dream-work, known as secondary elaboration, the 
object of which is to combine the immediate results of the work into a single and fairly 
coherent whole; during this process the material is often so arranged as to give rise to 
total misunderstanding, and for this purpose any necessary interpolations are made.
On the other hand, we should not overrate the dream-work or attribute to it more than is 
its due. Its activity is limited to the achievements here enumerated; condensation, 
displacement, plastic representation and secondary elaboration of the whole dream; these 
are all that it can effect. Such manifestations of judgment, criticism, surprise, or 
deductive reasoning, as are met with in dreams are not brought about by the dream-work 
and are only very rarely the expression of subsequent reflection about the dream; but are 
for the most part fragments of the latent thoughts introduced into the manifest dream 
with more or less modification and in a form suited to the context. Again, the dream-work 
cannot create conversation in dreams; save in a few exceptional cases, it is imitated 
from, and made up of, things heard or even said by the dreamer himself on the previous 
day, which have entered into the latent thoughts as the material or incitement of his 
dream. Neither do mathematical calculations come into the province of the dream-work; 
anything of the sort appearing in the manifest dream is generally a mere combination of 
numbers, a pseudo-calculation, quite absurd as such, and again only a copy of some 
calculation comprised in the latent thoughts. In these circumstances it is not surprising 
that the interest which was felt in the dream-work soon becomes directed instead towards 
the latent thoughts which disclose themselves in a more or less distorted form through 
the manifest dream. We are not justified, however, in a theoretical consideration of the 
subject, in let ting our interest stray so far that we altogether substitute the latent 
thoughts for the dream as a whole, and make some pronouncement on the latter which is 
only true of the former. It is strange that the findings of psycho-analysis could be so 
misused as to result in confusion between the two. The term dream can only be applied to 
the results of the dream-work, i.e., to the form into which the latent thoughts have been 
rendered by the dream-work.
This work is a process of a quite peculiar type; nothing like it has hitherto been known 
in mental life. This kind of condensation, displacement, and regressive translation of 
thoughts into images, is a novelty, the recognition of which in itself richly rewards our 
efforts in the field of psycho-analysis. You will again perceive, from the parallels to 
dream-work, the connections revealed between psycho-analytic and other research, 
especially in the fields of the development of speech and thought. You will only realize 
the further significance of the insight so acquired when you learn that the mechanism of 
the dream-work is a kind of model for the formation of neurotic symptoms.
I know, too, that it is not possible for us yet to grasp the full extent of the fresh 
gain accruing to psychology from these labours. We will only hint at the new proofs 
thereby afforded of the existence of unconscious mental activities —for this indeed is 
the nature of the latent dream-thoughts—and at the promise dream interpretation gives 
of an approach, wider than we ever guessed at, to the knowledge of the unconscious life 
of the mind.
Now, however, I think the time has come to give you individual examples of various short 
dreams, which will illustrate the points for which I have already prepared you.
TWELFTH LECTURE
Examples of Dreams and Analysis of Them You must not be disappointed if I present you 
once more with fragments of dream-interpretations, instead of inviting you to participate 
in the interpretation of one fine long dream. You will say that after so much preparation 
you surely have a right to expect that; and you will express your conviction that, after 
successful interpretations of so many thousands of dreams, it should long ago have been 
possible to collect a number of striking examples by which the truth of all our 
assertions about the dream-work and dream-thoughts could be demonstrated. Yes, but there 
are too many difficulties in the way of fulfilling this wish of yours.
In the first place, I must confess that there is nobody who makes the interpretation of 
dreams his main business. In what circumstances then, do we come to interpret them? At 
times we may occupy ourselves, for no particular purpose, with the dreams of a friend, or 
we may work out our own dreams over a period of time in order to train ourselves for 
psycho-analytic work; but chiefly we have to do with the dreams of nervous patients who 
are undergoing psycho-analytic treatment. These last dreams provide splendid material and 
are in no respect inferior to those of healthy persons, but the technique of the 
treatment obliges us to subordinate dream-interpretation to therapeutic purposes and to 
desist from the attempt to interpret a large number of the dreams as soon as we have 
extracted from them something of use for the treatment. Again, many dreams which occur 
during the treatment elude full interpretation altogether; since they have their origin 
in the whole mass of material in the mind which is as yet unknown to us, it is not 
possible to understand them until the completion of the cure. To relate such dreams would 
necessarily involve revealing all the secrets of a neurosis; this will not do for us, 
since we have taken up the problem of dreams in preparation for the study of the neuroses.
Now I expect you would willingly dispense with this material and would prefer to listen 
to the explanation of dreams of healthy persons or perhaps of your own. But the content 
of these dreams makes that impossible. One cannot expose oneself, nor anyone whose 
confidence has been placed in one, so ruthlessly as a thorough interpretation of a dream 
would necessitate; for, as you already know, they touch upon all that is most intimate in 
the personality. Apart from the difficulty arising out of the nature of the material, 
there is another difficulty as regards relating the dreams. You are aware that the dream 
seems foreign and strange to the dreamer himself; how much more so to an outsider to whom 
his personality is unknown. The literature of psycho-analysis shows no lack of good and 
detailed dream-analyses; I myself have published some which formed part of the history of 
certain pathological cases. Perhaps the best example of a dream-interpretation is that 
published by O. Rank, consisting of the analysis of two mutually related dreams of a 
young girl. These cover about two pages of print, while the analysis of them runs into 76 
pages. It would need almost a whole term's lectures in order to take you through a work 
of this magnitude. If we selected some fairly long and considerably distorted dream we 
should have to enter into so many explanations, to adduce so much material in the shape 
of associations and recollections, and to go down so many sidetracks, that a single 
lecture would be quite inadequate and would give no clear idea of it as a whole. So I 
must ask you to be content if I pursue a less difficult course, and relate some fragments 
from dreams of neurotic patients, in which this or that isolated feature may be 
recognized. Symbols are the easiest features to demonstrate and, after them, certain 
peculiarities of the regressive character of dream-representation. I will tell you why I 
regard each of the following dreams as worth relating.
1. A dream consisting only of two short pictures.: The dreamer's uncle was smoking a 
cigarette, although it was Saturday. A woman was fondling and caressing the dreamer as 
though he were her child.
With reference to the first picture, the dreamer (a Jew) remarked that his uncle was a 
very pious man who never had done, and never would do, anything so sinful as smoking on 
the Sabbath. The only association to the woman in the second picture was that of the 
dreamer's mother. These two pictures or thoughts must obviously be related to one 
another; but in what way? Since he expressly denied that his uncle would in reality 
perform the action of the dream, the insertion of the conditional if will at once suggest 
itself. "If my uncle, that deeply religious man, were to smoke a cigarette on the 
Sabbath, then I myself might be allowed to let my mother fondle me." Clearly, that is as 
much as to say that being fondled by the mother was something as strictly forbidden as 
smoking on the Sabbath is to the pious Jew. You will remember my telling you that in the 
dream-work all relations among the dream-thoughts disappear; the thoughts are broken up 
into their' raw material, and our task in interpreting is to reinsert these connections 
which have been omitted.
2. My writings on the subject of dreams have placed me to some extent in the position of 
public consultant on the question, and for many years now I have received letters from 
the most diverse quarters communicating dreams to me or asking for my opinion. Naturally 
I am grateful to all those who have given me sufficient material with their dreams to 
make an interpretation possible, or have themselves volunteered one. The following dream 
of a medical student in Munich dating from 1910, belongs to this category; and I quote it 
because it may prove to you how hard it is, generally speaking, to understand a dream 
until the dreamer has given us what information he can about it. For I have a suspicion 
that in the bottom of your hearts you think that the translating of the symbols is the 
ideal method of interpretation and that you would like to discard that of free 
association; I want, therefore, to clear your minds of so pernicious an error.
"July 13th, 1910. Towards morning I had the following dream: I was bicycling down a 
street in Tubingen, when a brown dachshund came rushing after me and caught hold of one 
of my heels. I rode a little further and then dismounted, sat down on a step and began to 
beat the creature off, for it had set its teeth fast in my heel. (The dog's biting me and 
the whole scene roused no unpleasant sensations.) Two elderly ladies were sitting 
opposite, watching me with grinning faces. Then I woke up and, as has frequently happened 
before, with the transition to waking consciousness the whole dream was clear to me."
In this instance symbolism cannot help us much, but the dreamer goes on to tell us: "I 
recently fell in love with a girl, just from seeing her in the street; but I had no means 
of introduction to her. I should have liked best to make her acquaintance through her 
dachshund, for I am a great animal-lover myself and was attracted by seeing she was one 
too." He adds that several times he had separated fighting dogs very skilfully, often to 
the amazement of the onlookers. Now we learn that the girl who had taken his fancy was 
always seen walking with this particular dog. She, however, has been eliminated from the 
manifest dream; only the dog associated with her has remained. Possibly the elderly 
ladies who grinned at him represented her, but the rest of what he tells us does not 
clear up this point. The fact that he was riding a bicycle in the dream was a direct 
repetition of the situation as he remembered it, for he had not met the girl with the dog 
except when he was bicycling.
3. When a man has lost someone dear to him, for a considerable period afterwards he 
produces a special type of dream, in which the most remarkable compromises are effected 
between his knowledge that that person is dead and his desire to call him back to life. 
Sometimes the deceased is dreamt of as being dead, and yet still alive because he does 
not know that he is dead, as if he would only really die if he did know it; at other 
times he is half dead and half alive, and each of these conditions has its distinguishing 
marks. We must not call these dreams merely nonsensical, for to come to life again is no 
more inadmissible in dreams than in fairy-tales, in which it is quite a common fate. As 
far as I have been able to analyse such dreams, it appeared that they were capable of a 
reasonable explanation, but that the pious wish to recall the departed is apt to manifest 
itself in the strangest ways. I will submit a dream of this sort to you, which certainly 
sounds strange and absurd enough, and the analysis of which will demonstrate many points 
already indicated in our theoretical discussions. The dreamer was a man who had lost his 
father some years previously:
My father was dead but had been exhumed and looked ill. He went on living, and I did all 
I could to prevent his noticing it. Then the dream goes on to other matters, apparently 
very remote.
That the father was dead we know to be a fact; but the exhumation had not taken place in 
reality; indeed, the question of real fact has nothing to do with anything that follows. 
But the dreamer went on to say that after he returned from his father's funeral one of 
his teeth began to ache. He wanted to treat it according to the Jewish precept: "If thy 
tooth offend thee, pluck it out," and, accordingly, went to the dentist. The latter, 
however, said that that was not the way to treat a tooth; one must have patience with it. 
"I will put something in it," he said, "to kill the nerve, and you must come back in 
three days' time, when I will take it out again." "This 'taking out,'" said the dreamer 
suddenly, "is the exhuming."
Now was he right? True, the parallel is not exact, for it was not the tooth which was 
taken out, but only a dead part of it. As a result of experience, however, we can well 
credit the dream-work with inaccuracies of this sort. We must suppose that the dreamer 
had, by a process of condensation, combined the dead father with the tooth, which was 
dead and which he yet retained. No wonder then that an absurdity was the result in the 
manifest dream, for obviously not all that was said about the tooth could apply to the 
father. What then are we to regard as the tertium comparation is between the father and 
the tooth, what common factor makes the comparison possible?
Such a factor must have existed, for the dreamer went on to observe that he knew the 
saying that if one dreams of losing a tooth it means that one is about to lose a member 
of his family.
We know that this popular interpretation is incorrect or at least correct only in a very 
distorted sense. We' shall therefore be the more surprised actually to discover the 
subject thus touched upon behind the other elements of the dream-content.
Without being pressed further, the dreamer then began to talk of his father's illness and 
death, and of the relations which had existed between father and son. The illness had 
been a long one, and the care and treatment of the invalid had cost the son a large sum 
of money. Yet it never seemed too much to him, nor did his patience ever fail or the wish 
occur to him that the end should come. He prided himself on his true Jewish filial piety 
and on his strict observance of the Jewish law. Does not a certain contradiction strike 
us here in the thoughts relating to the dream? He had identified the tooth with the 
father. He wanted to treat the former according to the Jewish law which commanded that a 
tooth which causes pain and annoyance should be plucked out. His father he also wanted to 
treat according to the precepts of the law, but here the command was that he must pay no 
heed to expense and annoyance, must take the whole burden upon himself, and not allow any 
hostile intention to arise against the cause of the trouble. Would not the agreement 
between the two situations be much more convincing if he had really gradually come to 
have the same feelings towards his sick father as he had towards his diseased tooth, that 
is to say, if he had wished for death to put a speedy end to his father's superfluous, 
painful and costly existence?
I have no doubt that this was, in reality, his attitude towards his father during the 
protracted illness and that his ostentatious assertions of filial piety were designed to 
divert his mind from any recollections of the sort. Under conditions such as these it is 
no uncommon thing for the death-wish against the father to be roused, and to mask itself 
with some ostensibly compassionate reflection, such as: "It would be a blessed release 
for him." But I want you particularly to notice that here in the latent thoughts 
themselves a barrier has been broken down. The first part of the thoughts was, we may be 
sure, only temporarily unconscious, that is, during the actual process of the dream-work; 
the hostile feelings towards the father, on the other hand, had probably been permanently 
so, possibly dating from childhood and having at times, during the father's illness, 
crept as it were timidly and in a disguised form into consciousness. We can maintain this 
with even greater certainty of other latent thoughts which have unmistakably contributed 
to the content of the dream. There are, it is true, no indications in it of hostile 
feelings towards the father; but when we enquire into the origin of such hostility in the 
life of the child we remember that fear of the father arises from the fact that in the 
earliest years of life it is he who opposes the sexual activity of the boy, as he is 
usually compelled to do again, after puberty, from motives of social expediency. This was 
the relation in which our dreamer stood to his father; his affection for him had been 
tinged with a good deal of respect and dread, the source of which was early sexual 
intimidation.
We can now explain the further phrases in the dream from the onanism complex. "He looked 
ill" was an allusion to another remark of the dentist's—that it did not look well for a 
tooth to be missing just there—but it also refers at the same time to the "looking ill" 
by which the young man, during the period of puberty, betrays, or fears lest he might 
betray, his excessive sexual activity. It was with a lightening of his own heart that in 
the manifest dream the dreamer transferred the look of ill ness from himself to his 
father, an inversion with which you are familiar as a device of the dream-work. "He went 
on living" accords both with the wish to recall the father to life and the promise of the 
dentist to save the tooth. The phrase "I did everything I could to prevent his noticing" 
is extremely subtly designed to lead us to complete it with the words "that he was dead." 
The only completion of them that really makes sense, however, is again to be traced to 
the onanism complex, where it is a matter of course that the young man should do all he 
can to conceal his sexual life from his father. Finally, I would remind you that the 
so-called "tooth-ache dreams" always refer to onanism, and the punishment for it that is 
feared.
You see how this incomprehensible dream is built up by a piece of remarkable and 
misleading condensation, by omitting from it all the thoughts that belong to the core of 
the latent train of thought, and by the creation of ambiguous substitute-formations to 
represent those thoughts which were deepest and most remote in time.
4. We have already tried repeatedly to get to the bottom of those prosaic and banal 
dreams which have nothing absurd or strange in them, but which suggest the question: Why 
should we dream about such trivialities at all? I will therefore quote a fresh example of 
this sort in the shape of three dreams connected with one another and dreamt by a young 
lady in the course of a single night.
(a) She was going through the hall in her house and struck her head on a low-hanging 
chandelier with such force as to draw blood. This episode did not remind her of anything 
that had actually happened; her remarks led in quite another direction: "You know how 
terribly my hair is coming out. Well, yesterday my mother said to me: 'My dear child, if 
it goes on like this, your head will soon be as bald as your buttocks.' " We see here 
that the head stands for the other end of the body. No further assistance is required to 
understand the symbolism of the chandelier: all objects capable of elongation are symbols 
of the male organ. The real subject of the dream then is a bleeding at the lower end of 
the body, caused by contact with the penis. This might still have other meanings; the 
dreamer's further associations show that the dream has to do with the belief that 
menstruation results from sexual intercourse with a man, a notion about sexual matters 
which is by no means uncommon amongst immature girls.
(b) The dreamer saw in a vineyard a deep hole which she knew had been caused by the 
uprooting of a tree. Her remark on this point was that "the tree was missing" meaning 
that she did not see the tree in the dream; but the same phrase serves to express another 
thought, which leaves us in no doubt as to the symbolic interpretation. The dream refers 
to another infantile notion on the subject of sex, to the belief that girls originally 
had the same genital organ as boys and that the later conformation of this organ has been 
brought about by castration (uprooting the tree).
(c) The dreamer was standing in front of her writing-table drawer which she knows so well 
that, if anyone touched it, she would immediately be aware of it. The writing-table 
drawer, like all drawers, chests and boxes, is a symbol of the female genital. She knew 
that when sexual intercourse (or, as she thought, any contact at all) has taken place the 
genital shows certain indications of the fact, and she had long had a fear of being 
convicted of this. I think that in all three dreams the main emphasis lies on the idea of 
knowing. She had in mind the time of childish investigations into sexual matters, of the 
results of which she had been very proud at the time.
5. Here is another example of symbolism. But this time I must preface it with a short 
account of the mental situation in which the dream occurred. A man and a woman who were 
in love had spent a night together; he described her nature as maternal, she was one of 
those women whose desire to have a child comes out irresistibly during caresses. The 
conditions of their meeting, however, made it necessary to take precautions to prevent 
the semen from entering the womb. On waking the next morning, the woman related the 
following dream: 
An officer with a red cap was pursuing her in the street. She fled from him and ran up 
the staircase, with him after her. Breathless, she reached her rooms and slammed and 
locked the door behind her. The man remained outside and, peeping through the keyhole in 
the door, she saw him sitting on a bench outside, weeping. 
In the pursuit by the officer with the red cap and the breathless climbing of the stairs 
you will recognize the representation of the sexual act. That the dreamer shuts her 
pursuer out may serve as an example of the device of in version so frequently employed in 
dreams, for in reality it was the man who withdrew before the completion of the sexual 
act. In the same way, she has projected her own feeling of grief on to her partner, for 
it is he who weeps in the dream, his tears at the same time alluding to the seminal fluid.

54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 504d-506c 
Our purpose, however, was to find out which are the tendencies exercising the censorship 
and upon which tendencies it is exercised. Now this question, which is fundamental for 
the understanding of dreams and perhaps of human life altogether; is easy to answer when 
we survey the series of dreams which we have succeeded in interpreting. The tendencies 
which exercise the censorship are those which are acknowledged by the waking judgment of 
the dreamer and with which he feels himself to be at one. You may be sure that when you 
repudiate any correctly found interpretation of a dream of your own, you do so from the 
same motives as cause the censorship to be exercised and distortion effected, and make 
interpretation necessary. Consider the dream of our lady of fifty: her dream, although it 
had not been interpreted, struck her as shocking and she would have been even more 
outraged if Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth had told her something of its unmistakable meaning; it 
was just this attitude of condemnation which caused the offensive passages in the dream 
to be replaced by a murmur.
Those tendencies against which the dream censorship is directed must next be described 
from the point of view of this inner critical standard. When we do this, we can only say 
that they are invariably of an objectionable nature, offensive from the ethical, 
aesthetic or social point of view, things about which we do not dare to think at all, or 
think of only with abhorrence. Above all are these censored wishes, which in dreams are 
expressed in a distorted fashion, manifestations of a boundless and ruthless egoism; for 
the dreamer's own ego makes its appearance in every dream, and plays the principal part, 
even if it knows how to disguise itself completely as far as the manifest content is 
concerned. This sacro egoismo of dreams is certainly not unconnected with the attitude of 
mind essential to sleep: the withdrawal of interest from the whole outside world.
The ego which has discarded all ethical bonds feels itself at one with all the demands of 
the sexual impulse, those which have long been condemned by our aesthetic training and 
those which are contrary to all the restraints imposed by morality. The striving for 
pleasure —the libido, as we say—chooses its objects unchecked by any inhibition, 
preferring indeed those which are forbidden: not merely the wife of another man, but, 
above all, the incestuous objects of choice which by common consent humanity holds 
sacred--the mother and the sister of men, the father and the brother of women. (Even the 
dream of our fifty-year-old lady is an incestuous one, the libido being unmistakably 
directed towards the son.) Desires which we believe alien to human nature show themselves 
powerful enough to give rise to dreams. Hate, too, rages unrestrainedly; wishes for 
revenge, and death-wishes, against those who in life are nearest and dearest—parents, 
brothers and sisters, husband or wife, the dreamer's own children—are by no means 
uncommon. These censored wishes seem to rise up from a veritable hell; when we know their 
meaning, it seems to us in our waking moments as if no censorship of them could be severe 
enough. Dreams themselves, however, are not to blame for this evil content; you surely 
have not forgotten that their harmless, nay, useful, function is to protect sleep from 
disturbance. Depravity does not lie in the nature of dreams; in fact, you know that there 
are dreams which can be recognized as gratifying justifiable desires and urgent bodily 
needs. It is true that there is no distortion in these dreams, but then there is no need 
for it, they can perform their function without offending the ethical and aesthetic 
tendencies of the ego. Remember, too, that the degree of distortion is proportion ate to 
two factors: on the one hand, the more shocking the wish that must be censored, the 
greater will be the distortion; but it is also great in proportion as the demands of the 
censorship are severe. Hence in a strictly brought up and prudish young girl, a rigid 
censorship will distort dream-excitations which we medical men would have recognized as 
permissible and harmless libidinous desires, and which the dreamer herself would judge in 
the same way ten years later.
Besides, we are still not nearly far enough advanced to allow ourselves to be outraged at 
the result of our work of interpretation. I think we still do not understand it properly; 
but first of all it is incumbent upon us to secure it against certain possible attacks. 
It is not at all difficult to detect weak points in it. Our interpretations were based on 
hypotheses which we adopted earlier: that there really is some meaning in dreams; that 
the idea of mental processes being unconscious for a time, which was first arrived at 
through hypnotic sleep, may be applied also to normal sleep; and that all associations 
are subject to determination. Now if, reasoning from these hypotheses, we had obtained 
plausible results in our dream interpretation we should have been justified in concluding 
that these hypotheses were correct. But what if these discoveries are of the kind I have 
described? In that case, surely it seems natural to say: "These results are impossibly 
absurd, at the very least highly improbable, so there must have been something wrong 
about the hypotheses. Either the dream is, after all, not a mental phenomenon, or there 
is nothing which is unconscious in our normal condition, or there is a flaw somewhere in 
our technique. Is it not simpler and more satisfactory to assume this than to accept all 
the abominable conclusions which we profess to have deduced from our hypotheses?"
Both! It is both simpler and more satisfactory, but not on that account necessarily more 
correct. Let us give ourselves time: the matter is not yet ripe for judgment. First of 
all, we can make the case against our interpretations even stronger. The fact that our 
results are so unpleasant and repellent would not perhaps weigh so very heavily with us; 
a stronger argument is the emphatic and well-grounded repudiation by dreamers of the 
wish-tendencies which we try to foist upon them after interpreting their dreams. "What," 
says one, "you want to prove to me from my dream that I grudge the money I have spent on 
my sister's dowry and my brother's education? But it is out of the question; I spend my 
whole time working for my brothers and sisters and my only interest in life is to do my 
duty by them, as, being the eldest, I promised our dead mother I would." Or a woman says: 
"I am supposed to wish that my husband were dead? Really that is outrageous nonsense! Not 
only is our married life very happy, though perhaps you won't believe that, but if he 
died I should lose everything I possess in the world." Or someone else will reply: "Do 
you mean to suggest that I entertain sexual desires towards my sister? The thing is 
ludicrous; she is nothing to me; we get on badly with one another, and for years I have 
not exchanged a word with her." We still might not be much impressed if these dreamers 
neither admitted nor denied the tendencies attributed to them; we might say that these 
are just the things of which they are quite unconscious. But when they detect in their 
own minds the exact opposite of such a wish as is interpreted to them, and when they can 
prove to us by their whole conduct in life that the contrary desire predominates, surely 
we must be nonplussed. Is it not about time now for us to discard our whole work of dream 
interpretation as something which has led to a reductio ad absurdum?
No, not even now. Even this stronger argument falls to pieces when subjected to a 
critical attack. Assuming that unconscious tendencies do exist in mental life, the fact 
that the opposite tendencies predominate in conscious life goes to prove nothing. Perhaps 
there is room in the mind for opposite tendencies, for contradictions, existing side by 
side; indeed, possibly the very predominance of the one tendency conditions the 
unconscious nature of the opposite. So the first objections raised only amount to the 
statement that the results of dream-interpretation are not simple and are very 
disagreeable. To the first charge we may reply that, however much enamoured of simplicity 
you may be, you cannot thereby solve one of the problems of dreams; you have to make up 
your mind at the outset to accept the fact of complicated relations. And, as regards the 
second point, you are manifestly wrong in taking the fact that something pleases or re 
pels yourself as the motive for a scientific judgment. What does it matter if you do find 
the results of dream-interpretation unpleasant, or even mortifying and repulsive? Qa 
n'empeche pas d'exister¹—as I, when a young doctor, heard my chief, Charcot, say in a 
similar case. We must be humble and put sympathies and antipathies honourably in the 
background if we would learn to know reality in this world. If a physicist could prove to 
you that organic life on the earth was bound to become extinct before long, would you 
venture to say to him also: "That cannot be so; I dislike the prospect too much." I think 
you would say nothing until another physicist came along and convicted the first of a 
mistake in his premises or his calculations. If you repudiate whatever is distasteful to 
you, you are repeating the mechanism of a dream structure rather than understanding and 
mastering it.
Perhaps, then, you will undertake to overlook the offensive nature of the censored dream 
wishes and will fall back upon the argument that it is surely very improbable that we 
ought to concede so large a part in the human constitution to what is evil. But do your 
own experiences justify you in this statement? I will say nothing of how you may appear 
in your own eyes, but have you met with so much goodwill in your superiors and rivals, so 
much chivalry in your enemies and so little envy amongst your acquaintances, that you 
feel it incumbent on you to protest against the idea of the part played by egoistic 
baseness in human nature? Do you not know how uncontrolled and unreliable the average 
human being is in all that concerns sexual life? Or are you ignorant of the fact that all 
the excesses and- aberrations of which we dream at night are crimes actually committed 
every day by men who are wide
¹It won't kill you.—ED.
awake? What does psycho-analysis do in this connection but confirm the old saying of 
Plato that the good are those who content themselves with dreaming of what others, the 
wicked, actually do?
And now look away from individuals to the great war still devastating Europe: think of 
the colossal brutality, cruelty and mendacity which is now allowed to spread itself over 
the civilized world. Do you really believe that a handful of unprincipled place-hunters 
and corrupters of men would have succeeded in letting loose all this latent evil, if the 
millions of their followers were not also guilty? Will you venture, even in these 
circumstances, to break a lance for the exclusion of evil from the mental constitution of 
humanity?

54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 518d-519d 
Substitution by allusion is familiar to us in our waking thoughts also, but with a 
difference; for it is essential in the latter that the allusion should be easily 
comprehensible, and that the content of the substitute should be associated to that of 
the thought proper. Allusion is also frequently employed in wit, where the condition of 
association in content is dispensed with and replaced by unfamiliar external 
associations, such as similarity of sound, ambiguity of meaning, etc. The condition of 
comprehensibility, however, is observed: the joke would lose all its point if we could 
not recognize without any effort what is the actual thing to which the allusion is made. 
But in dreams allusion by displacement is unrestricted by either limitation. It is 
connected most superficially and most remotely with the element for which it stands, and 
for that reason is not readily comprehensible; and, when the connection is traced, the 
interpretation gives the impression of an unsuccessful joke or of a forced, far-fetched 
and dragged in explanation. The object of the dream-censorship is only obtained when it 
has succeeded in making it impossible to trace the thought proper back from the allusion.
Displacement of accent is not a legitimate device, if our object be the expression of 
thought; though we do sometimes admit it in waking life in order to produce a comic 
effect. I can to some extent convey to you the impression of confusion which then 
results, by re minding you of an anecdote, according to which there was in a certain 
village a smith who had committed a capital offence. The court decided that the smith was 
guilty; but, since he was the only one of his trade in the village and therefore 
indispensable, whereas there were three tailors living there, one of these three was 
hanged in his place!
The third achievement of the dream-work is the most interesting from the psychological 
point of view. It consists in the transformation of thoughts into visual images. Let us 
be quite clear that not everything in the dream-thoughts is thus transformed; much keeps 
its original form and appears also in the manifest dream as thought or knowledge, on the 
part of the dreamer; again, translation of them into visual images is not the only 
possible transformation of thoughts. But it is nevertheless the essential feature in the 
formation of dreams, and, as we know, this part of the dream-work is, if we except one 
other case, the least subject to variation; for single dream-elements, moreover, plastic 
word-representation is a process already familiar to us.
Obviously this achievement is by no means an easy one. In order to get some idea of its 
difficulty, imagine that you had undertaken to replace a political leading article in a 
newspaper by a series of illustrations; you would have to abandon alphabetic characters 
in favour of hieroglyphics. The people and concrete objects mentioned in the article 
could be easily represented, perhaps even more satisfactorily, in pictorial form; but you 
would expect to meet with difficulties when you came to the portrayal of all the abstract 
words and all those parts of speech which indicate relations between the various 
thoughts, e.g., particles, conjunctions, and so forth. With the abstract words you would 
employ all manner of devices: for instance, you would try to render the text of the 
article into other words, more unfamiliar perhaps, but made up of parts more concrete and 
therefore more capable of such representation. This will remind you of the fact that most 
abstract words were originally concrete, their original significance having faded; and 
there fore you will fall back on the original concrete meaning of these words wherever 
possible. So you will be glad that you can represent the possessing of an object as a 
literal, physical sitting upon it (possess = potis + sedeo). This is just how the 
dream-work proceeds. In such circumstances you can hardly demand great accuracy of 
representation, neither will you quarrel with the dream-work for replacing an element 
which is difficult to reduce to pictorial form, such as the idea of breaking marriage 
vows, by some other kind of breaking, e.g., that of an arm or leg.1 In this way you will 
to some extent succeed in overcoming the awkwardness of rendering alphabetic characters 
into hieroglyphs.
When you come to represent those parts of speech which indicate thought-relations, e.g., 
because, therefore, but, and so on, you have no such means as those described to assist 
you; so that these parts of the text must be lost, so far as your translation into 
pictorial form is concerned. Similarly, the content of the dream-
¹Whilst correcting these pages, my eye happened to fall upon a newspaper paragraph which 
I reproduce here as affording unexpected confirmation of the above words.
DIVINE RETRIBUTION
A Broken Arm for a Broken Marriage-Vow Frau Anna M, the wife of a soldier in the reserve, 
accused Frau Clementine K of unfaithfulness to her husband. In her accusation she stated 
that Frau K had had an illicit relationship with Karl M during her husband's absence at 
the front, while he was sending her as much as 70 crowns a month. Besides this, she had 
already received a large sum of money from her (Frau M's) husband, while his wife and 
children had to live in hunger and misery. Some of her husband's comrades had informed 
her that he and Frau K had visited public-houses together and remained there drinking 
late into the night. The accused woman had once actually asked the husband of the 
accuser, in the presence of several soldiers, whether he would not soon leave his "old 
woman" and come to her, and the care taker of the house where Frau K lived had repeatedly 
seen the plaintiff's husband in Frau K's room, in a state of complete undress.
Yesterday, before a magistrate in the Leopoldstadt, Frau K denied knowing M at all: any 
intimate relations between them were out of the question, she said. Albertine M, a 
witness, however, gave evidence of having surprised Frau K in the act of kissing the 
accuser's husband.
M, who had been called as a witness in some earlier proceedings, had then denied any 
intimate relations with the accused. Yesterday, a letter was handed to the magistrate, in 
which the witness retracted his former denial and confessed that up to the previous June 
he had carried on illicit relations with Frau K. In the earlier proceedings he had denied 
his relations with the accused only because she had come to him before the action came 
into court and begged him on her knees to save her and say nothing. "To-day," wrote the 
witness, "I feel compelled to lay a full confession before the court, for I have broken 
my left arm and regard this as God's punishment for my offence."
The judge decided that the penal offence had been committed too long ago for the action 
to stand, where upon the accuser withdrew her accusation and the accused was discharged.

thoughts is resolved by the dream-work into its "raw material," consisting of objects and 
activities. You may be satisfied if there is any possibility of indicating somehow, by a 
more minute elaboration of the images, certain relations which cannot be represented in 
them selves. In a precisely similar manner, the dream-work succeeds in expressing much of 
the content of the latent thoughts by means of peculiarities in the form of the manifest 
dream, by its distinctness or obscurity, its division in to various parts, etc. The 
number of parts into which a dream is divided corresponds as a rule with the number of 
its main themes, the successive trains of thought in the latent dream; a short 
preliminary dream often stands in an introductory or casual relation to the subsequent 
detailed main dream; whilst a subordinate dream-thought is represented by the 
interpolation into the manifest dream of a change of scene, and so on. The form of 
dreams, then, is by no means unimportant in itself, and itself demands interpretation. 
Several dreams in the same night often have the same meaning, and indicate an endeavour 
to control more and more completely a stimulus of increasing urgency. In a single dream, 
a specially difficult element may be represented by doubling it, i.e., by more than one 
symbol.
If we continue the comparison of dream thoughts with the manifest dreams representing 
them, we discover in all directions things we should never have expected, e.g., that even 
nonsense and absurdity in dreams have their meaning; in fact, at this point the contrast 
between the medical and the psycho-analytic view of dreams becomes more marked than ever 
before. According to the medical view, the dream is absurd because while dreaming our 
mental activity has renounced its functions; according to our view, on the other hand, 
the dream becomes absurd when it has to represent a criticism implicit in the latent 
thoughts—the opinion: "It is absurd." The dream I told you, about the visit to the 
theatre ("three tickets for one florin and a half") is a good example of this: the 
opinion thus expressed was as follows: "It was absurd to marry so early."

54 FREUD: General Introduction, 539c-544d 
When anyone has gone as far as this in dream-interpretation and has accepted all our 
conclusions up to this point, it often happens that he comes to a standstill at this 
question of wish-fulfilment and asks: "Admitting that every dream means something and 
that this meaning may be discovered by employing the technique of psycho-analysis, why 
must it always, in face of all the evidence to the contrary, be forced into the formula 
of wish-fulfilment? Why must our thoughts at night be any less many-sided than our 
thoughts by day; so that at one time a dream might be a fulfilment of some wish, at 
another time, as you say yourself, the opposite, the actualization of a dread; or, again, 
the expression of a resolution, a warning, a weighing of some problem with its pros and 
cons, or a reproof, some prick of conscience, or an attempt to prepare oneself for 
something which has to be done—and so forth? Why this perpetual insistence upon a wish 
or, at the most, its opposite?"
It might be supposed that a difference of opinion on this point is a matter of no great 
moment, if there is agreement on all others. Cannot we be satisfied with having 
discovered the meaning of dreams and the ways by which we can find out the meaning? We 
surely go back on the advance we have made if we try to limit this meaning too strictly. 
But this is not so. A misunderstanding on this head touches what is essential to our 
knowledge of dreams and imperils its value for the understanding of neuroses. Moreover, 
that readiness to oblige the other party which has its value in business life is not only 
out of place but actually harmful in scientific matters.
My first answer to the question why dreams should not be many-sided in their meaning is 
the usual one in such a case: I do not know why they should not be so, and should have no 
objection if they were. As far as I am concerned, they can be so! But there is just one 
trifling obstacle in the way of this wider and more convenient conception of 
dreams—that as a matter of fact they are not so. My second answer would emphasize the 
point that to assume that dreams represent manifold modes of thought and intellectual 
operations is by no means a novel idea to myself: once, in the history of a pathological 
case, I recorded a dream which occurred three nights running and never again; and gave it 
as my explanation that this dream corresponded to a resolution, the repetition of which 
became unnecessary as soon as that resolution was carried out. Later on, I published a 
dream which represented a confession. How is it possible for me then to contradict myself 
and assert that dreams are always and only wish-fulfilments?
I do it rather than permit a stupid misunderstanding which might cost us the fruit of all 
our labours on the subject of dreams; a mis understanding that confounds the dream with 
the latent dream-thoughts, and makes statements with regard to the former which are 
applicable to the latter and to the latter only. For it is perfectly true that dreams can 
represent, and be themselves replaced by, all the modes of thought just enumerated: 
resolutions, warnings, reflections, preparations or attempts to solve some problem in 
regard to conduct, and so on. But when you look closely, you will recognize that all this 
is true only of the latent thoughts which have been transformed into the dream. You learn 
from interpretations of dreams that the unconscious thought-processes of mankind are 
occupied with such resolutions, preparations and reflections, out of which dreams are 
formed by means of the dreamwork. If your interest at any given moment is not so much in 
the dream-work, but centres on the unconscious thought-processes in people, you will then 
eliminate the dream-formation and say of dreams themselves, what is for all practical 
purposes correct, that they represent a warning, a resolve, and so on. This is what is 
often done in psycho-analytic work: generally we endeavour simply to demolish the 
manifest form of dreams and to substitute for it the corresponding latent thoughts in 
which the dream originated.
Thus it is that we learn quite incidentally from our attempt to assess the latent dream 
thoughts that all the highly complicated mental acts we have enumerated can be performed 
unconsciously—a conclusion surely as tremendous as it is bewildering.
But to go back a little: you are quite right in speaking of dreams as representing these 
various modes of thought, provided that you are quite clear in your own minds that you 
are using an abbreviated form of expression and do not imagine that the manifold variety 
of which you speak is in itself part of the essential nature of dreams. When you speak of 
a dream you must mean either the manifest dream, i.e., the product of the dream-work, or 
at most that work itself, i.e., the mental process which forms the latent dream-thoughts 
into the manifest dream. To use the word in any other sense is a confusion of ideas which 
is bound to be mischievous. If what you say is meant to apply to the latent thoughts 
behind the dream, then say so plainly, and do not add to the obscurity of the problem by 
your loose way of expressing yourselves. The latent dream-thoughts are the material which 
is transformed by the dream work into the manifest dream. What makes you constantly 
confound the material with the process which deals with it? If you do that, in what way 
are you superior to those who know of the final product only, without being able to 
explain where it comes from or how it is constructed?
The only thing essential to the dream itself is the dream-work which has operated upon 
the thought-material; and when we come to theory we have no right to disregard this, even 
if in certain practical situations it may be neglected. Further, analytic observation 
shows that the dream-work never consists merely in translating the latent thoughts into 
the archaic or regressive forms of expression described. On the contrary, something is 
invariably added which does not belong to the latent thoughts of the day-time, but which 
is the actual motive force in dream-formation; this indispensable component being the 
equally unconscious wish, to fulfil which the content of the dream is transformed. In so 
far, then, as you are considering only the thoughts represented in it, the dream may be 
any conceivable thing—a warning, a resolve, a preparation, and so on; but besides this, 
it itself is always the fulfilment of an unconscious wish, and, when you regard it as the 
result of the dream-work, it is this alone. A dream, then, is never simply the expression 
of a resolve or warning, and nothing more: in it the resolve, or whatever it may be, is 
translated into the archaic form with the assistance of an unconscious wish, and 
metamorphosed in such a way as to be a fulfilment of that wish. This single 
characteristic, that of fulfilling a wish, is the constant one: the other component 
varies; it may indeed itself be a wish; in which event the dream represents the 
fulfilment of a latent wish from our waking hours brought about by the aid of an 
unconscious wish. 
Now all this is quite clear to myself, but I do not know whether I have succeeded in 
making it equally clear to you; and it is difficult to prove it to you; for, on the one 
hand, proof requires the evidence afforded by a careful analysis of many dreams and, on 
the other hand, this, the crucial and most important point in our conception of dreams, 
cannot be presented convincingly without reference to considerations upon which we have 
not yet touched. Seeing how closely linked up all phenomena are, you can hardly imagine 
that we can penetrate very far into the nature of any one of them without troubling 
ourselves about others of a similar nature. Since as yet we know nothing about those 
phenomena which are so nearly akin to dreams—neurotic symptoms—we must once more 
content ourselves with what we actually have achieved. I will merely give you the 
explanation of one more example and adduce a new consideration.
Let us take once more that dream to which we have already reverted several times, the one 
about the three theatre tickets for one florin and a half. I can assure you that I had no 
ulterior motive in selecting it in the first in stance for an illustration. You know what 
the latent thoughts were: the vexation, after hearing that her friend had only just 
become engaged, that she herself should have married so hastily; depreciation of her 
husband and the idea that she could have found a better one if only she had waited. We 
also know already that the wish which made a dream out of these thoughts was the desire 
to look on, to be able to go to the theatre—very probably an offshoot of an old 
curiosity to find out at last what really does happen after marriage. It is well known 
that in children this curiosity is regularly directed towards the sexual life of the 
parents; that is to say, it is an infantile impulse and, wherever it persists later in 
life, it has its roots in the infantile period. But the news received on the day previous 
to the dream gave no occasion for the awakening of this skoptophilia; it only roused 
vexation and regret. This wish-impulse (of skoptophilia) was not at first connected with 
the latent thoughts, and the results of the dream-interpretation could have been used by 
the analysis without taking it into consideration at all. But again, the vexation was not 
in itself capable of producing a dream: no dream could be formed out of the thought: "It 
was folly to be in such a hurry to marry" until that thought had stirred up the early 
wish to see at last what happened after marriage. Then this wish formed the 
dream-content, substituting for marriage the going to the theatre; and the form was that 
of the fulfilment of the earlier wish: "Now I may go to the theatre and look at all that 
we have never been allowed to see; and you may not. I am married and you have got to 
wait." In this way the actual situation was transformed into its opposite and an old 
triumph substituted for the recent discomfiture; and incidentally, satisfaction both of a 
gazing impulse and of one of egoistic rivalry was brought about. It is this latter 
satisfaction which deter mines the manifest content of the dream; for in it she is 
actually sitting in the theatre, while her friend cannot get in. Those portions of the 
dream-content behind which the latent thoughts still conceal themselves are to be found 
in the form of inappropriate and incomprehensible modifications of the gratifying 
situation. The business of interpretation is to put aside those features in the whole 
which merely represent a wish-fulfilment and to reconstruct the painful latent 
dream-thoughts from these indications.
The consideration which I said I wished to call to your notice is intended to direct your 
attention to these latent dream-thoughts now brought into prominence. I must beg you not 
to forget that, first, the dreamer is unconscious of them; secondly, that they are quite 
reason able and coherent, so that we can understand them as comprehensible reactions to 
whatever stimulus has given rise to the dream; and, thirdly, that they may have the value 
of any mental impulse or intellectual operation. I will designate these thoughts more 
strictly now than hitherto as the residue from the previous day; the dreamer may 
acknowledge them or not. I then distinguish between this residue and latent 
dream-thoughts so that, as we have been accustomed to do all along, I will call 
everything which we learn from the interpretation of the dream the latent dream-thoughts, 
while the residue from the previous day is only a part of the latent dream-thoughts. Then 
our conception of what happens is this: something has been added to the residue from the 
previous day, something which also belongs to the unconscious, a strong but repressed 
wish-impulse, and it is this alone which makes the formation of a dream possible. The 
wish-impulse, acting upon the residue, creates the other part of the latent 
dream-thoughts, that part which no longer need appear rational or comprehensible from the 
point of view of our waking life.
To illustrate the relation between the residue and the unconscious wish I have elsewhere 
made use of a comparison which I cannot do better than repeat here. Every business 
undertaking requires a capitalist to defray the expenses and an entrepreneur who has the 
idea and understands how to carry it out. Now the part of the capitalist in 
dream-formation is always and only played by the unconscious wish; it supplies the 
necessary fund of mental energy for it: the entrepreneur is the residue from the previous 
day, determining the manner of the expenditure. It is, of course, quite possible for the 
capitalist himself to have the idea and the special knowledge needed, or for the 
entrepreneur himself to have capital. This simplifies the practical situation but makes 
the theory of it more difficult. In economics we discriminate between the man in his 
function of capitalist and the same man in his capacity as entrepreneur; and this 
distinction restores the funda mental situation upon which our comparison is based. The 
same variations are to be found in the formation of dreams: I leave you to follow them 
out for yourselves.
We cannot go any further at this point; for I think it likely that a disturbing thought 
has long since occurred to you and it deserves a hearing. You may ask: "Is the so-called 
residue really unconscious in the sense in which the wish necessary for the formation of 
the dream is unconscious?" Your suspicion is justified: this is the salient point in the 
whole matter. They are not both unconscious in the same sense. The dream-wish belongs to 
a different type of unconscious, which, as we have seen, has its roots in the infantile 
period and is furnished with special mechanisms. It is very expedient to distinguish the 
two types of unconscious from one another by speaking of them in different terms. But, 
all the same, we will rather wait until we have familiarized ourselves with the phenomena 
of the neuroses. If our conception of the existence of any kind of unconscious be already 
regarded as fantastic, what will people say if we admit that to reach our solution we 
have had to assume two kinds?
Let us break off at this point. Once more you have heard only an incomplete statement; 
but is it not a hopeful thought that this knowledge will be carried further, either by 
ourselves or by those who come after us? And have not we ourselves learnt enough that is 
new and startling?
FIFTEENTH LECTURE
Doubtful Points and Critical
Observations
We will not leave the subject of dreams with out dealing with the most common doubts and 
uncertainties arising in connection with the novel ideas and conceptions we have been 
discussing: those of you who have followed these lectures attentively will have collected 
some material of the kind.
1. You may have received an impression that even with strict adherence to technique our 
work of dream-interpretation leaves so much room for uncertainty that reliable 
translation of manifest dreams into their latent dream thoughts will be thereby 
frustrated. You will urge first that one never knows whether any particular element in a 
dream is to be under stood literally or symbolically, since things employed as symbols do 
not thereby cease to be themselves. Where there is no objective evidence to decide the 
question the interpretation on that particular point will be left to be arbitrarily 
determined by the interpreter. Further, since in the dream-work opposites coincide, it is 
in every instance uncertain whether a specific dream-element is to be understood in a 
positive or a negative sense, as itself or as its opposite—another opportunity for the 
interpreter to exercise a choice. Thirdly, on account of the frequency with which 
inversion of every kind is employed in dreams, it is open to him to assume whenever he 
chooses that such an inversion has taken place. Finally you will point to having heard 
that one is seldom certain that the interpretation arrived at is the only possible one, 
and that there is danger of overlooking another perfectly admissible interpretation of 
the same dream. In these circumstances, you will conclude, the discretion of the 
interpreter has a latitude that seems incompatible with any objective certainty in the 
result. Or you may also assume that the fault does not lie in dreams themselves, but that 
something erroneous in our conceptions and premises produces the unsatisfactory character 
of our interpretations.
All that you say is undeniable and yet I do not think it justifies either of your 
conclusions: that dream-interpretation as practised by us is at the mercy of the 
interpreter's arbitrary decisions or that the inadequacy of the results calls in question 
the correctness of our procedure. If for the arbitrary decision of the interpreter you 
will substitute his skill, his experience and his understanding, then I am with you. This 
kind of personal factor is of course indispensable, especially when interpretation is 
difficult; it is just the same in other scientific work, however; it can't be helped that 
one man will use any given technique less well, or apply it better, than another. The 
impression of arbitrariness made, for example, by the interpretation of symbols is 
corrected by the reflection that as a rule the connection of the dream-thoughts with one 
another, and of the dream with the life of the dreamer and the whole mental situation at 
the time of the dream, points directly to one of all the possible interpretations and 
renders all the rest useless. The conclusion that the imperfect character of the 
interpretations proceeds from fallacious hypotheses loses its force when consideration 
shows that, on the contrary, the ambiguity or indefiniteness of dreams is a quality which 
we should necessarily expect in them.
Let us call to mind our statement that the dream-work undertakes a translation of the 
dream-thoughts into a primitive mode of expression, analogous to hieroglyphics. Now all 
such primitive systems of expression are necessarily acompanied by ambiguity and 
indefiniteness ; but we should not on that account be justified in doubting their 
practicability. You know that the coincidence of opposites in the dream-work is analogous 
to what is called the antithetical sense of primal words in the oldest languages. The 
philologist, R. Abel, to whom we owe this information, writing in 1884, begs us not on 
any account to imagine that there was any ambiguity in what one person said to another by 
means of ambivalent words of this sort. On the contrary, intonation, gestures and the 
whole context can have left no doubt what ever which of the two opposites the speaker had 
in mind to convey. In writing where gestures are absent the addition of little pictorial 
signs, not meant to receive separate oral expression, replaced them: e.g., a drawing of a 
little man, either crouching or standing upright, according as the ambiguous ken of the 
hieroglyphic meant weak or strong. So that misunderstanding was avoided in spite of the 
ambiguity of sounds and signs.
In ancient systems of expression, for in stance, in the scripts of the oldest languages, 
indefiniteness of various kinds is found with a frequency which we should not tolerate in 
our writings today. Thus in many Semitic writings only the consonants of the words 
appear: the omitted vowels have to be supplied by the reader from his knowledge and from 
the context. Hieroglyphic writing follows a similar principle, although not exactly the 
same; and this is the reason why nothing is known of the pronunciation of ancient 
Egyptian. There are besides other kinds of indefiniteness in the sacred writings of the 
Egyptians: for example, it is left to the writer's choice to inscribe the pictures from 
right to left or from left to right. To be able to read them, we have to remember that we 
must be guided by the direction of the faces of the figures, birds, and so forth. But it 
was also open to the writer to set the pictures in vertical columns and, in the case of 
inscriptions on smaller objects, he was led by considerations of what was pleasing to the 
eye, and of the space at his disposal, to introduce still further alterations in the 
arrangement of the signs. The most confusing feature in hieroglyphic script is that there 
is no spacing between the words. The pictures are all placed at equal intervals on the 
page, and it is generally impossible to know whether any given sign goes with the 
preceding one or forms the beginning of a new word. In Persian cuneiform writing, on the 
other hand, a slanting sign is used to separate the words.
The Chinese language, both spoken and written, is exceedingly ancient but is still used 
today by four hundred million people. Don't suppose that I understand it at all; I only 
obtained some information about it because I hoped to find in it analogies to the kinds 
of indefiniteness occurring in dreams; nor was I disappointed in my expectation, for 
Chinese is so full of uncertainties as positively to terrify one. As is well known, it 
consists of a number of syllabic sounds which are pronounced singly or doubled in 
combination. One of the chief dialects has about four hundred of these sounds, and since 
the vocabulary of this dialect is estimated at somewhere about four thousand words it is 
evident that every sound has an average of ten different meanings—some fewer, but some 
all the more. For this reason there are a whole series of devices to escape ambiguity, 
for the context alone will not show which of the ten possible meanings of the syllable 
the speaker wishes to convey to the hearer. Amongst these devices is the combining of two 
sounds into a single word and the use of four different "tones" in which these syllables 
may be spoken. For purposes of our comparison a still more interesting fact is that this 
language is practically without grammar: it is impossible to say of any of the 
one-syllable words whether it is a noun, a verb or an adjective; and, further there are 
no inflections to show gender, number, case, tense or mood. The language consists, as we 
may say, of the raw material only; just as our thought-language is resolved into its raw 
material by the dreamwork omitting to express the relations in it. Wherever there is any 
uncertainty in Chinese the decision is left to the intelligence of the listener, who is 
guided by the context. I made a note of a Chinese saying, which literally translated runs 
thus: "Little what see, much what wonderful." This is simple enough to understand. It may 
mean: "The less a man has seen, the more he finds to wonder at," or "There is much to 
wonder at for the man who has seen little." Naturally there is no occasion to choose 
between these two translations which differ only in grammatical construction. We are 
assured that in spite of these uncertainties the Chinese language is a quite 
exceptionally good medium of expression; so it is clear that indefiniteness does not 
necessarily lead to ambiguity.
Now we must certainly admit that the position of affairs is far less favourable in regard 
to the mode of expression in dreams than it is with these ancient tongues and scripts; 
for these latter were originally designed as a means of communication; that is, they were 
intended to be understood, no matter what ways or means they had to employ. But just this 
character is lacking to dreams: their object is not to tell anyone anything; they are not 
a means of communication; on the contrary, it is important to them not to be under stood. 
So we ought not to be surprised or misled if the result is that a number of the 
ambiguities and uncertainties in dreams cannot be determined. The only certain piece of 
knowledge gained from our comparison is that this indefiniteness (which people would like 
to make use of as an argument against the accuracy of our dream-interpretations) is 
rather to be recognized as a regular characteristic of all primitive systems of 
expression.
Practice and experience alone can determine the extent to which dreams can in actual fact 
be understood. My own opinion is that this is possible to a very great extent; and a 
comparison of the results obtained by properly trained analysts confirms my view. It is 
well known that the lay public, even in scientific circles, delights to make a parade of 
superior scepticism in the face of the difficulties and uncertain ties which beset a 
scientific achievement; I think they are wrong in so doing. You may possibly not all know 
that the same thing happened at the time when the Babylonian and Assyrian inscriptions 
were being deciphered. There was a point at which public opinion was active in declaring 
that the men deciphering the cuneiform writing were victims of a chimera and that the 
whole business of investigation was a fraud. But in the year 1857 the Royal Asiatic 
Society made a conclusive test. They challenged four of the most distinguished men 
engaged in this branch of research—Rawlinson, Hincks, Fox Talbot and Oppert—to send 
to the Society in sealed envelopes independent translations of a newly discovered 
inscription, and, after comparing the four versions, they were able to announce that 
there was sufficient agreement between the four to justify belief in what had been 
achieved and confidence in further progress. The mockery of the learned laity then 
gradually came to an end, and certainty in the reading of cuneiform documents has 
advanced enormously since then.
2. A second series of objections is closely connected with an impression which you also 
have probably not escaped; namely, that a number of the solutions achieved by our method 
of dream-interpretation seem strained, specious, dragged in—in other words, forced, or 
even comical or joking. These criticisms are so frequent that I will take at random the 
last that has come to my ears. Now listen: a head master in Switzerland—that free 
country— was recently asked to resign his post on account of his interest in 
psycho-analysis. He protested and a Berne paper published the decision of the school 
authorities on his case. I shall quote from the article a few sentences which refer to 
psycho-analysis: "Further, we are amazed at the far-fetched and factitious character of 
many of the examples given in the said book by Dr. Pfister of Zurich. ... It is indeed a 
matter for surprise that the head-master of a Training College should accept so 
credulously all these assertions and such specious evidence." These sentences purport to 
be the final opinion of "One who judges calmly." I am much more inclined to think this 
"calm" factitious. Let us examine these remarks more closely in the expectation that a 
certain amount of reflection and knowledge of the subject will do no harm, even to a 
"calm judgment."

54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 539c- 540a 
When anyone has gone as far as this in dream-interpretation and has accepted all our 
conclusions up to this point, it often happens that he comes to a standstill at this 
question of wish-fulfilment and asks: "Admitting that every dream means something and 
that this meaning may be discovered by employing the technique of psycho-analysis, why 
must it always, in face of all the evidence to the contrary, be forced into the formula 
of wish-fulfilment? Why must our thoughts at night be any less many-sided than our 
thoughts by day; so that at one time a dream might be a fulfilment of some wish, at 
another time, as you say yourself, the opposite, the actualization of a dread; or, again, 
the expression of a resolution, a warning, a weighing of some problem with its pros and 
cons, or a reproof, some prick of conscience, or an attempt to prepare oneself for 
something which has to be done—and so forth? Why this perpetual insistence upon a wish 
or, at the most, its opposite?"
It might be supposed that a difference of opinion on this point is a matter of no great 
moment, if there is agreement on all others. Cannot we be satisfied with having 
discovered the meaning of dreams and the ways by which we can find out the meaning? We 
surely go back on the advance we have made if we try to limit this meaning too strictly. 
But this is not so. A misunderstanding on this head touches what is essential to our 
knowledge of dreams and imperils its value for the understanding of neuroses. Moreover, 
that readiness to oblige the other party which has its value in business life is not only 
out of place but actually harmful in scientific matters.
My first answer to the question why dreams should not be many-sided in their meaning is 
the usual one in such a case: I do not know why they should not be so, and should have no 
objection if they were. As far as I am concerned, they can be so! But there is just one 
trifling obstacle in the way of this wider and more convenient conception of 
dreams—that as a matter of fact they are not so. My second answer would emphasize the 
point that to assume that dreams represent manifold modes of thought and intellectual 
operations is by no means a novel idea to myself: once, in the history of a pathological 
case, I recorded a dream which occurred three nights running and never again; and gave it 
as my explanation that this dream corresponded to a resolution, the repetition of which 
became unnecessary as soon as that resolution was carried out. Later on, I published a 
dream which represented a confession. How is it possible for me then to contradict myself 
and assert that dreams are always and only wish-fulfilments?
I do it rather than permit a stupid misunderstanding which might cost us the fruit of all 
our labours on the subject of dreams; a mis understanding that confounds the dream with 
the latent dream-thoughts, and makes statements with regard to the former which are 
applicable to the latter and to the latter only. For it is perfectly true that dreams can 
represent, and be themselves replaced by, all the modes of thought just enumerated: 
resolutions, warnings, reflections, preparations or attempts to solve some problem in 
regard to conduct, and so on. But when you look closely, you will recognize that all this 
is true only of the latent thoughts which have been transformed into the dream. You learn 
from interpretations of dreams that the unconscious thought-processes of mankind are 
occupied with such resolutions, preparations and reflections, out of which dreams are 
formed by means of the dreamwork. If your interest at any given moment is not so much in 
the dream-work, but centres on the unconscious thought-processes in people, you will then 
eliminate the dream-formation and say of dreams themselves, what is for all practical 
purposes correct, that they represent a warning, a resolve, and so on. This is what is 
often done in psycho-analytic work: generally we endeavour simply to demolish the 
manifest form of dreams and to substitute for it the corresponding latent thoughts in 
which the dream originated.

54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 541b 
Let us take once more that dream to which we have already reverted several times, the one 
about the three theatre tickets for one florin and a half. I can assure you that I had no 
ulterior motive in selecting it in the first in stance for an illustration. You know what 
the latent thoughts were: the vexation, after hearing that her friend had only just 
become engaged, that she herself should have married so hastily; depreciation of her 
husband and the idea that she could have found a better one if only she had waited. We 
also know already that the wish which made a dream out of these thoughts was the desire 
to look on, to be able to go to the theatre—very probably an offshoot of an old 
curiosity to find out at last what really does happen after marriage. It is well known 
that in children this curiosity is regularly directed towards the sexual life of the 
parents; that is to say, it is an infantile impulse and, wherever it persists later in 
life, it has its roots in the infantile period. But the news received on the day previous 
to the dream gave no occasion for the awakening of this skoptophilia; it only roused 
vexation and regret. This wish-impulse (of skoptophilia) was not at first connected with 
the latent thoughts, and the results of the dream-interpretation could have been used by 
the analysis without taking it into consideration at all. But again, the vexation was not 
in itself capable of producing a dream: no dream could be formed out of the thought: "It 
was folly to be in such a hurry to marry" until that thought had stirred up the early 
wish to see at last what happened after marriage. Then this wish formed the 
dream-content, substituting for marriage the going to the theatre; and the form was that 
of the fulfilment of the earlier wish: "Now I may go to the theatre and look at all that 
we have never been allowed to see; and you may not. I am married and you have got to 
wait." In this way the actual situation was transformed into its opposite and an old 
triumph substituted for the recent discomfiture; and incidentally, satisfaction both of a 
gazing impulse and of one of egoistic rivalry was brought about. It is this latter 
satisfaction which deter mines the manifest content of the dream; for in it she is 
actually sitting in the theatre, while her friend cannot get in. Those portions of the 
dream-content behind which the latent thoughts still conceal themselves are to be found 
in the form of inappropriate and incomprehensible modifications of the gratifying 
situation. The business of interpretation is to put aside those features in the whole 
which merely represent a wish-fulfilment and to reconstruct the painful latent 
dream-thoughts from these indications.

54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 808d- 817a 
Anyone who loves the science of the mind must accept these hardships as well.
Freud
Vienna Summer 1932
together again in order to discuss with you the new developments, or it may be 
improvements, which have taken place in psycho-analytic theory during the interval. From 
more than one point of view it is right and proper that we should turn our attention, in 
the first place, to the theory of dreams. This theory occupies a peculiar position in the 
history of psycho analysis; it marks a turning-point. With the theory of dreams, analysis 
passed from being a psycho-therapeutic method to being a psychology of the depths of 
human nature. Ever since then the theory of dreams has remained the most characteristic 
and the most peculiar feature of the young science, something which has no parallel in 
the rest of scientific knowledge, a new found land which has been reclaimed from the 
regions of Folklore and Mysticism. The strangeness of the ideas which are necessarily 
involved in it has made it into a shibboleth, the use of which distinguishes those who 
might become believers in psycho-analysis from those who are incapable of comprehending 
it. Speaking for myself, I always found it a thing I could hold on to during those 
difficult times when the unsolved problems of the neuroses used to confuse my 
inexperienced judgment. When ever I began to have doubts about the correct ness of my 
tentative conclusions, the moment I managed to translate a senseless and complicated 
dream into a clear and intelligible mental process in the dreamer, I felt, with renewed 
confidence, that I was on the right track.
It is therefore of especial interest for us to follow, in regard to this particular 
matter of the theory of dreams, what changes psycho analysis has undergone during the 
interval I have mentioned, and what progress it has made in gaining appreciation and 
understanding from contemporary thought. I may as well tell you straight away that you 
will be disappointed in both directions.
Let us look through the volumes of the Internationale Zeitschrift fur (arztliche) Psycho 
analyse, in which the most important work on our subject has appeared since 1913. In the 
earlier volumes you will find one recurring heading, "On the Interpretation of Dreams," 
under which will be a quantity of contributions on various points of dream-theory. But 
the further you go, the rarer such contributions become; this standing heading eventually 
disappears entirely. The analysts behave as though they had nothing more to say about the 
dream, as though the whole subject of dream-theory were finished and done with. If, on 
the other hand, you ask how much of the theory of dreams is accepted by outsiders, the 
numerous psychiatrists and psycho-therapeutists who warm their pot of soup at our 
fire—without indeed being very grateful for our hospitality—the so-called educated 
people who are in the habit of appropriating the more startling of the conclusions of 
science, the Hterati and the general public, then the answer is not very satisfactory. A 
few formulae are generally known, and, among them, several which we have never put 
forward, such as the statement that all dreams are of a sexual nature; but even such 
important things as the fundamental distinction between the manifest dream-content and 
the latent dream-thoughts, the view that anxiety dreams do not contradict the 
wish-fulfilling function of the dream, the impossibility of interpreting a dream unless 
one knows the relevant associations of the dreamer, and, above all, the recognition of 
the fact that the most important part of the dream is the dream-work, seem, every one of 
them, to be as far removed from the consciousness of the generality of mankind as they 
were thirty years ago. I myself have every reason to say this, because during that period 
I have received an enormous number of letters, in. which the writers inscribe their 
dreams for interpretation, or ask for information about the nature of dreams. They 
declare that they have read the Interpretation of Dreams, and yet in every sentence they 
betray their lack of understanding of our dream-theory. That will not prevent our once 
more giving an account of what we know about dreams. You will remember that last time we 
devoted a whole group of lectures to showing how we have come to understand this hitherto 
unexplained psychic phenomenon.
Supposing someone, say a patient under analysis, tells us one of his dreams; then we 
assume that he has made one of those communications to us to which he committed himself 
when he entered on his analytical treatment. It is, of course, a communication which is 
insufficiently communicative, because a dream is, in itself, not a social utterance; it 
is not a means for making oneself understood. We have not, indeed, the least idea what 
the dreamer wishes to say, and he himself knows no better than ourselves. At the outset, 
we have to make a quick decision. On the one hand, the dream may be, as the 
non-analytical physicians assure us, an indication that the dreamer has slept badly, that 
not all the parts of his brain achieved a uniform state of rest, that certain regions of 
it endeavoured to go on working under the influence of unknown stimuli and could only do 
so in a very incomplete way. If that is the case, then we are quite right not to bother 
ourselves any longer over this psycho logically worthless product of nocturnal 
disturbance. For how could we expect from the investigation of such things to arrive at 
any thing useful for our purposes? On the other hand, however—-but it is clear that 
from the outset we have decided otherwise. We have perhaps quite arbitrarily—made the 
assumption, put forward the postulate, that even this unintelligible dream must be a 
perfectly valid, sensible, and valuable psychic act, of which we can make use in the 
analysis, just like any other communication. Only the result of our attempt can show us 
whether we are right. If we are able to turn the dream into a valuable utterance of this 
kind, then we obviously have a chance of learning something new, and of obtaining 
information of such a sort as otherwise would remain inaccessible to us.
Now, however, the difficulties of our task, and the puzzling nature of our theme become 
apparent. How are we going to set about turning a dream into a normal communication, and 
how are we going to explain that a part of the utterance of our patient has taken on a 
form which is as unintelligible for him as for us? 
You will observe, ladies and gentlemen, that this time I am not expounding the subject on 
genetic lines, but I am speaking dogmatically. The first thing we have to do is to lay 
the foundations of our new attitude towards the problem of the dream by introducing two 
new concepts and two new names. We call what one usually refers to as the dream, the 
dream-text or the manifest dream, and what we are looking for, what we, as it were, 
suspect to lie behind the dream, the latent dream-thoughts. Now we can express our two 
problems in the following way: we have got to turn the manifest dream into the latent 
dream, and we have to show how the latter became the former in the mental life of the 
dreamer. The first bit is a practical problem, it comes under the heading of 
dream-interpretation, and requires a technique; the second is a theoretical problem, its 
solution should be the explanation of the hypothetical dream-work, and can only be a 
theory. Both the technique of dream-interpretation and the theory of the dream-work have 
to be built up from the beginning.
Which bit shall we begin with? I think we should start with the technique of 
dream-interpretation. It has a clearer outline and will make a more vivid impression on 
you.
The patient, then, has described a dream which we have to interpret. We have listened 
quietly without making use of our powers of reflection. What do we do next? We determine 
to bother our heads as little as possible over what we have heard—over the manifest 
dream, that is to say. Naturally this manifest dream displays all sorts of 
characteristics to which we are not completely indifferent. It may be coherent, smoothly 
composed, like a literary work, or unintelligibly confused, almost like a delirium; it 
may have absurd elements, or jokes and apparently brilliant inferences; it may seem clear 
and well defined to the dreamer, or it may be dim and indefinite; the pictures in it may 
have the full sensuous force of a perception, or they may be as shadowy and vague as a 
mist. The greatest variety of characteristics can be found distributed in the various 
parts of the same dream. Finally, the dream may be attended by an indifferent feeling 
tone, or by a very strong pleasurable or painful affect. You must not think that we 
regard this end less variety as a matter of no importance; we shall come back to it 
later, and shall find in it much that is useful for our interpretation; but for the 
present we must put it aside, and travel along the main road which leads to the 
interpretation of the dream. This means that we ask the dreamer as well to free himself 
from the impression of the manifest dream, to switch his attention from the dream as a 
whole to individual parts of its content, and to tell us one after another the things 
that occur to him in connection with these parts, what associations come into his mind 
when he turns his mental eye on to each of them separately.
That is a curious technique, is it not? It is not the usual way to treat a communication 
or an utterance. You guess, of course, that behind this procedure there lie concealed 
assumptions which have not yet been mentioned. But let us proceed. In what order shall we 
get the patient to take the parts of his dream? Here we have a variety of courses open to 
us. We can simply follow the chronological order in which the dream has been presented to 
us in description. That is what one might call the strictest, the classical method. Or we 
can ask the dreamer to look for the residue of the previous day in his dream, because 
experience has taught us that in almost every dream is incorporated a memory trace of, or 
an allusion to, an event (or it may be several events) of the previous day; and if we 
follow up these links we often dis cover all of a sudden the bridge from the apparently 
remote dream-world to the real life of the patient. Or else we tell him to begin with 
those elements in the dream-content which have struck him on account of their clarity and 
sensuous force. We happen to know that-it is particularly easy for him to obtain 
associations to such elements. It makes no difference by which of these ways we choose to 
reach the associations we are looking for.
And now let us consider these associations. They consist of the most varied material, 
memories of the day before, the "dream day,."-and memories of times long since passed, 
deliberations, arguments for and against, admissions and questionings. A great many of 
them are poured out by the patient with ease, while he hesitates when he reaches others. 
Most of them show a clear connection with one of the elements of the dream, and no 
wonder, because they have actually sprung from these elements; but it may also happen 
that the patient intro duces them with the words: "That doesn't seem to have anything to 
do with the dream at all; I say it because it comes into my head."
When one listens to this flood of ideas, one soon notices that they have more in common 
with the content of the dream than the mere fact that it provided them with their origin. 
They throw an astonishingly clear fight on all the parts of the dream, they fill in the 
gaps between them, and they make their odd juxta position intelligible. Finally, we must 
get clear the relation between them and the content of the dream. The dream seems to be 
an abridged extract from the associations, which has been put together in accordance with 
rules which we have not yet considered; its elements are like the representatives of a 
multitude which have been chosen by vote. There is no doubt that our technique has 
enabled us to discover what the dream has replaced, and wherein lies its psychological 
value; and what we have discovered displays no longer the bewildering peculiarities of 
the dream, its strangeness and its confused nature.
But let us have no misunderstanding. The associations to the dream are not the latent 
dream-thoughts. These are contained, but not completely contained, in the associations. 
On the one hand, the associations produce a great deal more than we require for the 
formulation of the latent dream-thoughts, namely, all the elaborations, the transitions, 
and the connecting links, which the intellect of the patient must produce on the road 
which leads to the dream-thoughts. On the other hand, the association has often stopped 
short immediately before it has reached the dream-thoughts themselves; it has only 
touched them allusively. We now play a part ourselves: we follow up the indications, we 
draw inevitable conclusions and bring out into the open what the patient in his 
associations has only touched upon. That sounds as if we allow our cleverness and our 
arbitrary imagination to play with the material which the dreamer has placed at our 
disposal, and misuse it to the extent of reading into his utterances what we have no 
business to find there; and indeed it is no easy matter to show the propriety of our 
behaviour in an abstract exposition. But if you try a dream-analysis yourselves, or make 
yourselves familiar with a well described example from our literature, you will be 
convinced of the compelling manner in which such a process of interpretation unfolds 
itself.
Although in dream-interpretation we are in general and predominantly dependent on the 
associations of the dreamer, nevertheless we treat certain elements of the content quite 
in dependently—mainly because we have to, because, as a rule, associations refuse to 
come. We noticed at an early stage that this happens always in connection with the same 
material; these elements are not very numerous, and long experience has taught us that 
they are to be taken as symbols for something else, and to be interpreted as such. In 
comparison with the other elements of the dream, one can give them a permanent meaning, 
which need not, however, be ambiguous, and the limits of which are determined by special 
laws, which are of an unusual kind. Since we understand how to translate these symbols, 
while the dreamer does not, although he himself has made use of them, it may very well be 
that the sense of the dream is immediately clear to us, even before we have begun the 
work of dream-interpretation, as soon as we have heard the text of the dream, while the 
dreamer himself is still puzzled by it. But in the earlier lectures I have already said 
so much about symbolism, about our knowledge of it, and about the special problems to 
which it gives rise, that I need not go over the same ground again today.
That, then, is our method of dream-interpretation. The next and very proper question is: 
Can we by these means interpret every dream? And the answer is: No, not everyone; but so 
many that we can afford to be absolutely certain about the utility and correctness of our 
procedure. But why not all? The recent answer to this question will teach us something 
important, which has a bearing on the psychological conditions of dream formation. It is 
because the work of interpretation is carried on in the face of resistance, which may 
vary from an imperceptible amount to an amount so great that we cannot overcome it—at 
any rate with the means which are at present at our disposal. One cannot help observing 
the manifestation of this resistance during the interpretation. In many places the 
associations are given without hesitation, and the first or second of them already 
provides us with the explanation. In other places the patient pauses and hesitates before 
he utters an association, and then one often has to listen to a long chain of ideas 
before one gets anything which is of any use for the understanding of the dream. We are 
right in supposing that the longer and the more circuitous the chain of associations^ the 
stronger is the resistance. And in the forgetting of dreams, too, we sense the same 
influence. Often enough it happens that, however much he may try, the patient cannot 
remember one of his dreams. But when, by a piece of analytical work, we have removed a 
difficulty which has been disturbing the patient in his relation to the analysis, the 
forgotten dream will come into his mind quite suddenly. Two more observations may be 
mentioned here. It very often happens that a piece of the dream is missing, which is 
eventually added as an afterthought. This is to be regarded as an attempt to forget that 
particular piece. Experience shows that it is this very piece of the dream which is the 
most valuable; we suppose that a stronger resistance stood in the way of its 
communication than was the case with the other parts. And, furthermore, we often find 
that a patient may try to combat the forgetting of his dreams by writing them down 
immediately after, he wakes up. We may as well tell him that it is useless to do so, 
because the resistance from which he may have preserved the text of the dream will then 
transfer itself to the associations and render the manifest dream inaccessible for 
interpretation. This being the case, we need not be surprised if a further increase of 
the resistance suppresses the associations altogether, and thus frustrates the 
interpretation of the dream entirely.
From all this we draw the conclusion that the resistance which we come across during the 
process of dream-interpretation must play some part in the formation of the dream as 
well. One can actually distinguish between dreams which have been formed under low 
pressure of resistance and those in which the resistance has been high. But this pressure 
also changes within the same dream from one place to another; it is responsible for the 
gaps, the obscurities and the confusion which may upset the coherence of the most 
beautiful dreams.
But what is the resistance doing here, and what is it resisting? Now for us a resistance 
is the sure sign of a conflict. There must be a force present which is trying to express 
something, and another which is striving to prevent its expression. What comes into being 
as the manifest dream may, therefore, be regarded as comprising all the solutions to 
which the battle between these two opposing forces can be reduced. At one point one of 
the forces may have been able to get through what it wanted to say, at another the 
counteracting force may have succeeded ..in, abolishing- the -intended communication 
entirely, or may have substituted for it something which betrays no sign of it. The most 
usual cases, and those which are the most characteristic of the process of dream 
formation, are those in which the conflict results in a compromise, so that the 
communicating force can indeed say what it wants to say, but not in the way it wants to 
say it; it is toned down, distorted, and made unrecognizable. If, therefore, the dream 
does not faithfully represent the dream-thoughts, if a process of interpretation is 
necessary to bridge the gulf between the two, this is the result of the counteracting, 
inhibiting, and restraining force whose existence we have inferred from perceiving the 
resistance in dream-interpretation. So long as we regarded the dream as an isolated 
phenomenon, independent of other psychological formations which are allied to it, we 
called this force the dream-censor.
You have long been familiar with the fact that this censorship is not a mechanism which 
is peculiar to dreams. You remember that the conflict of two psychic factors, which we— 
roughly—call the repressed unconscious and the conscious, dominates our lives, and that 
the resistance against the interpretation of dreams, the hall-mark of the 
dream-censorship, is none other than the repression-resistance which keeps these two 
factors apart. You also know that, under certain conditions, other psychological 
formations emerge from the conflict between these same factors, formations which are the 
result of compromises just as dreams are; and you will not require me to repeat all that 
is involved in my introduction to the theory of the neuroses in order to put before you 
what we know about the conditions under which such compromise formations come about. You 
will have realized that the dream is a pathological product, the first member of the 
series which includes the hysterical symptom, the obsession, and the delusion among its 
members; it is differentiated from the others by its transitoriness and by the fact that 
it occurs under conditions which are part of normal life. For we must never forget that 
the dream-life is, as Aristotle has already told us, the way our mind works during sleep. 
The state of sleep represents a turning away from the real external world, and thus 
provides a necessary condition for the development of a psychosis. The most penetrating 
study of serious cases of psychosis will reveal no characteristic which is more typical 
of these pathological conditions. In psychoses, however, the turning away from reality is 
brought about in two ways; either because the repressed unconscious is too strong, so 
that it overwhelms the conscious, which tries to cling on to reality, or because reality 
has become so unbearably painful that the threatened ego, in a despairing gesture of 
opposition, throws itself into the arms of the unconscious impulses. The harmless, 
dream-psychosis is the result of a consciously willed, and only temporary, withdrawal 
from the external world; it ceases to operate when relations with the external world are 
resumed. While the sleeper is isolated, there is an alteration in the distribution of his 
psychic energy; part of the repressive expenditure, which is otherwise used to keep down 
the unconscious, can be saved, for if the unconscious makes use of its relative freedom 
and enters on some activity, it finds the avenue to motor expression stopped up, and only 
the innocent outlet of hallucinatory satisfaction open to it. It can now, therefore, form 
a dream, but the, fact of dream-censorship shows that enough repressive resistance 
remains operative even during sleep.
Here we have an opportunity of answering the question whether the dream has also a 
function to perform, whether any useful task is entrusted to it. The condition of repose 
without stimuli, which the state of sleep attempts to bring about, is threatened from 
three sides: in a chance fashion by external stimuli during sleep, by interests of the 
day-before which have not yet abated, and, in an unavoidable manner, by the unsatisfied 
repressed impulses, which are ready to seize on any opportunity for expression. On 
account of the nightly reduction of the repressive forces, the risk is run that the 
repose of sleep will be broken every time the outer and inner disturbances manage to link 
up with one of the unconscious sources of energy. The dream-process allows the result of 
such a combination to discharge itself through the channel of a harmless hallucinatory 
experience, and thus insures the continuity of sleep. There is no contradiction of this 
function in the fact that the dream sometimes wakes the sleeper in a state of anxiety; it 
is rather a sign that the watcher regards the situation as being too dangerous, and no 
longer thinks he can cope with it. Quite often, indeed, while we are still asleep, we are 
aware of the comforting thought, which is there to prevent our waking up: "After all, it 
is only a dream."
That is all, ladies and gentlemen, that I wanted to say about dream-interpretation, the 
business of which is to trace the manifest dream back to the latent dream-thoughts. When 
this has been done, the interest in the dream from the point of view of practical 
analysis fades. The analyst links up the communication which he has received in the form 
of a dream with the patient's other communications and proceeds with the analysis. We, 
however, wish to linger a little longer over the dream; we are tempted to study the 
process by means of which the latent dream-thoughts are transformed into the manifest 
dream. We call this the dream-work. You will remember that in the previous lectures I 
described it in such detail that, for today's review of the subject, I can confine myself 
to the briefest summary.
The process of dream-work is something quite new and strange, the like of which has never 
before been known. It has given us our first glimpse into those processes which go on in 
our unconscious mental system, and shows us that they are quite different from what we 
know about our conscious thought, and that to this latter they must necessarily appear 
faulty and preposterous. The importance of this discovery is increased when we realize 
that the same mechanisms—we hardly dare call them "thought processes"—are at work in 
the formation of neurotic symptoms as have turned the latent dream-thoughts into the 
manifest dream. 
In what follows, I cannot avoid making my exposition a schematic one. Supposing we have 
before us in a given instance all the latent thoughts, more or less affectively toned, 
which have taken the place of the manifest dream after a complete interpretation. We 
shall then notice a distinction among them, and this distinction will take us a long way. 
Almost all these dream-thoughts will be recognized or acknowledged by the dreamer; he 
will admit that he thought thus at. one time or another, or that he might very well have 
done so. But he may resist the acceptation of one single thought, it is foreign to him, 
perhaps even repellent; it may be that he will passionately repudiate it. Now it becomes 
clear to us that the other thoughts are bits of his conscious, or, more correctly, of his 
pre-conscious thought; they might very well have been thought during waking life, and 
have probably formed themselves during the day. This one rejected thought, or, better, 
this one impulse, is a child of the night; it belongs to the unconscious of the dreamer, 
and is therefore disowned and repudiated by him. It had to await the nightly relaxation 
of re pression in order to achieve any sort of expression. In any case, the expression 
that it obtains is enfeebled, distorted, and disguised; without the work of 
interpretation we should never have discovered it. It is thanks to its connection with 
the other unobjectionable dream thoughts that this unconscious impulse has had the 
opportunity of slipping past the barrier of the censorship in an unostentatious disguise; 
on the other hand, the pre-conscious dream thoughts owe to the same connection their 
power of occupying the mental life, even during sleep. We can, indeed, have no doubt 
about this: the unconscious impulse is the real creator of the dream, it provides the 
psychic energy required for its formation. Just like any other instinctual impulse it can 
do no other than seek its own satisfaction, and our experience in dream-interpretation 
shows us, moreover, that this is the meaning of all dreaming. In every dream an 
instinctual wish is displayed as fulfilled. The nightly cutting-off of mental life from 
reality, and the regression to primitive mechanisms which it makes possible, enable this 
desired instinctual satisfaction to be experienced in a hallucinatory fashion as actually 
happening. On account of the same process of regression, ideas are turned into visual 
pictures in the dream; the latent dream-thoughts are, that is to say, dramatized and 
illustrated.
From this piece of dream-work we obtain information about some of the most striking and 
peculiar characteristics of the dream. Let me repeat the stages of dream-formation. The 
introduction: the wish to sleep, the voluntary withdrawal from the outside world. Two 
things follow from this: firstly, the possibility for older and more primitive modes of 
activity to manifest themselves, i.e., regression; and, secondly, the decrease of the 
repression-resistance which weighs on the unconscious. As a result of this latter 
feature, an opportunity for dream formation presents itself, which is seized upon by the 
factors which are the occasion of the dream; that is to say, the internal and external 
stimuli which are in activity. The dream which thus eventuates is already a 
compromise-formation; it has a double function: it is on the one hand in conformity with 
the ego (egosyntonic), since it subserves the wish to sleep by draining off the stimuli 
which would other wise disturb it, while on the other hand it allows to a repressed 
impulse the satisfaction which is possible in these circumstances in the form of an 
hallucinatory wish-fulfilment. The whole process of dream-formation, which is permitted 
by the sleeping ego, is, however, under the control of the censorship, a control which is 
exercised by what is left of the forces of repression. I cannot explain the process more 
simply; it is not in itself simpler than that. But now I can proceed with the description 
of the dream-work.
Let us go back once more to the latent dream-thoughts. Their dominating element is the 
repressed impulse, which has obtained some kind of expression, toned down and disguised 
though it may be, by associating itself with stimuli which happen to be there and by 
tacking itself on the residue of the day before. Just like any other impulse this one 
presses forward toward satisfaction in action, but the path to motor discharge is closed 
to it on account of the physiological characteristics of the state of - sleep, and so it 
is forced to travel in the retrograde direction to perception, and content itself with an 
hallucinatory satisfaction. The latent dream-thoughts are therefore turned into a 
collection of sensory images and visual scenes. As they are travelling in this direction 
something happens to them which seems to us new and bewildering. All the verbal apparatus 
by means of which the more subtle thought-relations are expressed, the conjunctions and 
prepositions, the variations of declension and conjugation, are lacking, because the 
means of portraying them are absent: just as in primitive, grammarless speech, only the 
raw material of thought can be expressed, and the abstract is merged again in the 
concrete from which it sprang. What is left over may very well seem to lack coherence. It 
is as much the result of the archaic regression in the mental apparatus as of the demands 
of: the. censorship that so much use is made of the representation of certain objects and 
processes by means of symbols which have become strange to conscious thought. But of more 
far-reaching import are the other alterations to which the elements comprising the 
dream-thoughts are subjected. Such of them as have any point of contact are condensed 
into new unities. When the thoughts are translated into pictures, those forms are 
indubitably preferred which allow of this kind of telescoping, or condensation; it is as 
though a force were at work which subjected the material to a process of pressure or 
squeezing together. As a result of condensation, one element in a manifest dream may 
correspond to a number of elements of the dream-thoughts; but, conversely, one of the 
elements from among the dream-thoughts may be represented by a number of pictures in the 
dream.
Even more remarkable is the other process of displacement or transference of accent, 
which in conscious thinking figures only as an error in thought or as a method employed 
in jokes. For the individual ideas which make up the dream-thoughts are not all of equal 
value; they have various degrees of affective-tone attached to them, and corresponding to 
these, they are judged as more or less important, and more or less worthy of attention. 
In the dreamwork these ideas are separated from their affects; the affects are treated 
separately. They may be transferred to something else, they may remain where they were, 
they may undergo transformation, or they may disappear from the dream entirely. The 
importance of the ideas which have been shorn of their affect reappears in the dream in 
the form of the sensuous vivid ness of the dream-pictures; but we notice that this 
accent, which should lie on important elements, has been transferred to unimportant ones, 
so that what seems to be pushed to the forefront in the dream, as the most important 
element in it, only plays a subsidiary role in the dream-thoughts, and, conversely, what 
is important among the dream-thoughts obtains only incidental and rather indistinct 
representation in the dream. No other factor in the dreamwork plays such an important 
part in rendering the dream strange and unintelligible to the dreamer. Displacement is 
the chief method employed in the process of dream-distortion, which the dream-thoughts 
have to undergo under the influence of the censorship.
After these operations on the dream-thoughts, the dream is almost ready. There is still, 
however, a more or less non-constant factor, the so-called secondary elaboration, that 
makes its appearance after the dream has come into consciousness as an object of 
perception. When the dream has come into consciousness, we treat it in exactly the same 
way that we treat any content of perception; we try to fill in the gaps, we add 
connecting links, and often enough we let ourselves in for serious misunderstandings. But 
this, as it were, rationalizing activity, which at its best provides the dream with a 
smooth facade, such as cannot correspond to its real content, may be altogether absent in 
some cases, or only operate in a very feeble way, in which case the dream displays to 
view all its gaps and inconsistencies. On the other hand, one must not forget that the 
dream-work, too, does not always function with equal force; quite often it limits its 
activity to certain parts of the dream-thoughts, while others are allowed to come into 
the dream unaltered. In this event, one has the impression that one has carried out the 
most complicated and subtle intellectual operations during the dream, that one has made 
brilliant speculations or jokes, or that one has come to decisions or solved problems; 
really, however, all this is the result of our normal mental activity, and may just as 
well have happened during the day before the dream as during the night. It has nothing to 
do with the dream-work, nor does it display any feature which is characteristic of 
dreams. It is perhaps not superfluous once more to emphasise the distinction which 
subsists among the dream thoughts themselves, between the unconscious impulse and the 
residues of the preceding day. While the latter exhibit the whole variety of our mental 
activity, the former, which is the real motive force of the dream, always finds its 
outlet in a wish-fulfilment.
I could have told you all that fifteen years ago; in fact I actually did tell it you at 
the time. Now let us bring together such modifications and new discoveries as have been 
made during the interval.
I have already told you that I am afraid you will find that there is very little to say; 
so you will not understand why I have obliged you to listen to the same thing twice over, 
and have obliged myself to say it. But fifteen years have passed, and I hoped that in 
this way I might most easily re-establish contact with you. And indeed these elementary 
matters are of such decisive importance for the understanding of psycho-analysis that it 
is a good thing to hear them for a second time, and the very fact that they have remained 
the same after fifteen years is in itself something worth knowing.
You will naturally find in the literature of these years a great deal of confirmatory 
material and exposition of details, of which I only intend to give you examples. I can 
also add to this a certain amount that was already known before. Most of it has to do 
with symbolism and the other methods of representation in dreams. Only quite recently the 
physicians at an American university refused to allow that psycho-analysis was a science, 
on the ground that it admits of no experimental proof. They might have raised the same 
objection against astronomy; experimentation with the heavenly bodies is, after all, 
exceedingly difficult. There one has to rely on observation. Nevertheless, certain 
Viennese investigators have made a start on the experimental confirmation of our theory 
of dream-symbolism. Dr. Schrotter discovered as long ago as 1912 that when one orders a 
deeply hypnotized person to dream of sexual activities, the sexual material in the dream 
that is thus provoked is represented by the symbols which are familiar to us. For 
example, a woman is told to dream of sexual intercourse with a lady friend of hers. In 
her dream the friend appears with a travelling-bag, which has a label pasted on it: 
"Ladies only." Even more impressive are the experiments of Betlheim and Hartmann (1924), 
who worked with patients suffering from the so-called Korsakow's syndrome. They told the 
patient stories with a crude sexual content, and then noted the distortions which 
appeared when he was asked to reproduce what he had heard. Here again the symbols with 
which we are familiar as standing for the sexual organs and sexual intercourse cropped 
up, and among them the symbol of a staircase, with regard to which the authors very 
properly observe that it would be inaccessible to a conscious intention to distort.
Silberer performed a very interesting series of experiments in which he showed that one 
can surprise the dream-work, as it were, in flagrante delicto, and see how it translates 
the abstract thoughts into visual pictures. When he tried to force himself, in a very 
tired and sleepy condition, to perform an intellectual task, the thought itself would 
escape him, and in its place would come a visual image, which was often a substitute for 
it.
Here is a simple example. The thought which Silberer set before himself was that he must 
smooth out an uneven passage in an article. His visual image was that he saw himself 
planing a piece of wood. It often happened in these experiments that it was not the idea 
which was awaiting elaboration that formed the content of the visual image, but his own 
state of mind while he was trying to make the effort—the subjective condition rather 
than the objective content. This Silberer calls a functional phenomenon. An example will 
easily show you what is meant. The author is trying to make a comparison between the 
views of two philosophers about some problem, but in his drowsiness one of these views is 
always escaping him, and finally he has a vision of himself asking information of a 
cross-grained secretary, who is leaning over his desk and disregards him at first and 
then looks at him with a disagreeable expression, as if he would like to send him about 
his business. It is probably due to the conditions of the experiment itself that the 
visual images which are aroused in this way so often represent introspective material.
Let us consider symbols a little longer. There were some which we thought we had grasped, 
but about which we were nevertheless troubled because we could give no account of how 
that particular symbol got its particular meaning. In such cases any confirmation we 
could get from other sources, from philology, folklore, mythology or ritual, was 
particularly welcome. An example of this kind was the symbol of a cloak. We held that in 
a woman's dream a cloak stood for a man. I hope now you will be impressed when you hear 
that Reik (1920) tells us: "In the ancient marriage ceremony of the Bedouins, the 
bridegroom covers the bride with a special cloak which is called an 'aba,' and at the 
same time utters the ritual words: 'Let no man in the future cover thee but me'" (from 
Robert Eisler, Weltenmantel und Himmelszelt). We have also discovered a great many new 
symbols, of which I will give you two examples. According to Abraham (1922), a spider in 
a dream is a symbol of the mother; but it means the phallic mother, whom one fears, so 
that the fear of the spider expresses the horror of incest with the mother and the 
abhorrence felt towards the female genitals. You know, perhaps, that the mythological 
figure of the Medusa's head is to be traced back to the same motif of castration-fear. 
The other symbol of which I should like to speak is the symbol of the bridge. Ferenczi 
has explained it (1921-1922). It stands originally for the male genital organ, which 
connects the parents with each other during sexual intercourse; but it develops into a 
wider set of meanings, which spring out of the first. Since the male genital organ is 
responsible for the fact that one can emerge from the waters of birth into the world, the 
bridge depicts the passage from Yonder (not-yet-born ness, the womb) to Here (life), and 
since mankind also represents death as the return into the mother's womb (into the 
water), the symbol of the bridge gets the meaning of something that brings about death; 
and finally, further removed from its original meaning, it indicates transition, or any 
change of condition whatever. That is why a woman who has not yet overcome her desire to 
be a man so frequently dreams of bridges which are too short to reach the other side.
Very often pictures and situations appear in the manifest content of the dream which re 
mind one of well-known themes from fairy stories, legends and myths. The interpretation 
of such dreams throws light on the original motives which created these themes, though 
naturally we must not forget the change of meaning which this material has undergone 
during the passage of time. Our work of interpretation uncovers what one might call the 
raw material, which often enough may be regarded as sexual in the broadest sense of the 
word, but which has found the most varied application in later elaborations. When we 
trace things back like this, we very often arouse the rage of all investigators who do 
not share the analytical point of view, as though we were seeking to deny or 
underestimate all the later developments which the raw material has undergone. None the 
less, such ways of looking at things are instructive and interesting. The same is true of 
the tracing back of various motifs of plastic art—as, for example, when J. Eisler 
(1919), guided by the dreams of his patients, interprets analytically the young man 
playing with a little boy, portrayed in the Hermes of Praxiteles. Finally, I cannot help 
mentioning how often mythological themes find their explanation through 
dream-interpretation. The story of the Labyrinth, for example, is found to be a 
representation of anal birth; the tortuous paths are the bowels, and the thread of 
Ariadne is the umbilical cord.

54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, esp 809b
Let us look through the volumes of the Internationale Zeitschrift fur (arztliche) Psycho 
analyse, in which the most important work on our subject has appeared since 1913. In the 
earlier volumes you will find one recurring heading, "On the Interpretation of Dreams," 
under which will be a quantity of contributions on various points of dream-theory. But 
the further you go, the rarer such contributions become; this standing heading eventually 
disappears entirely. The analysts behave as though they had nothing more to say about the 
dream, as though the whole subject of dream-theory were finished and done with. If, on 
the other hand, you ask how much of the theory of dreams is accepted by outsiders, the 
numerous psychiatrists and psycho-therapeutists who warm their pot of soup at our 
fire—without indeed being very grateful for our hospitality—the so-called educated 
people who are in the habit of appropriating the more startling of the conclusions of 
science, the Hterati and the general public, then the answer is not very satisfactory. A 
few formulae are generally known, and, among them, several which we have never put 
forward, such as the statement that all dreams are of a sexual nature; but even such 
important things as the fundamental distinction between the manifest dream-content and 
the latent dream-thoughts, the view that anxiety dreams do not contradict the 
wish-fulfilling function of the dream, the impossibility of interpreting a dream unless 
one knows the relevant associations of the dreamer, and, above all, the recognition of 
the fact that the most important part of the dream is the dream-work, seem, every one of 
them, to be as far removed from the consciousness of the generality of mankind as they 
were thirty years ago. I myself have every reason to say this, because during that period 
I have received an enormous number of letters, in. which the writers inscribe their 
dreams for interpretation, or ask for information about the nature of dreams. They 
declare that they have read the Interpretation of Dreams, and yet in every sentence they 
betray their lack of understanding of our dream-theory. That will not prevent our once 
more giving an account of what we know about dreams. You will remember that last time we 
devoted a whole group of lectures to showing how we have come to understand this hitherto 
unexplained psychic phenomenon.

54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, esp 810b-d
Which bit shall we begin with? I think we should start with the technique of 
dream-interpretation. It has a clearer outline and will make a more vivid impression on 
you.
The patient, then, has described a dream which we have to interpret. We have listened 
quietly without making use of our powers of reflection. What do we do next? We determine 
to bother our heads as little as possible over what we have heard—over the manifest 
dream, that is to say. Naturally this manifest dream displays all sorts of 
characteristics to which we are not completely indifferent. It may be coherent, smoothly 
composed, like a literary work, or unintelligibly confused, almost like a delirium; it 
may have absurd elements, or jokes and apparently brilliant inferences; it may seem clear 
and well defined to the dreamer, or it may be dim and indefinite; the pictures in it may 
have the full sensuous force of a perception, or they may be as shadowy and vague as a 
mist. The greatest variety of characteristics can be found distributed in the various 
parts of the same dream. Finally, the dream may be attended by an indifferent feeling 
tone, or by a very strong pleasurable or painful affect. You must not think that we 
regard this end less variety as a matter of no importance; we shall come back to it 
later, and shall find in it much that is useful for our interpretation; but for the 
present we must put it aside, and travel along the main road which leads to the 
interpretation of the dream. This means that we ask the dreamer as well to free himself 
from the impression of the manifest dream, to switch his attention from the dream as a 
whole to individual parts of its content, and to tell us one after another the things 
that occur to him in connection with these parts, what associations come into his mind 
when he turns his mental eye on to each of them separately.
That is a curious technique, is it not? It is not the usual way to treat a communication 
or an utterance. You guess, of course, that behind this procedure there lie concealed 
assumptions which have not yet been mentioned. But let us proceed. In what order shall we 
get the patient to take the parts of his dream? Here we have a variety of courses open to 
us. We can simply follow the chronological order in which the dream has been presented to 
us in description. That is what one might call the strictest, the classical method. Or we 
can ask the dreamer to look for the residue of the previous day in his dream, because 
experience has taught us that in almost every dream is incorporated a memory trace of, or 
an allusion to, an event (or it may be several events) of the previous day; and if we 
follow up these links we often dis cover all of a sudden the bridge from the apparently 
remote dream-world to the real life of the patient. Or else we tell him to begin with 
those elements in the dream-content which have struck him on account of their clarity and 
sensuous force. We happen to know that-it is particularly easy for him to obtain 
associations to such elements. It makes no difference by which of these ways we choose to 
reach the associations we are looking for.

54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, esp 812d
You have long been familiar with the fact that this censorship is not a mechanism which 
is peculiar to dreams. You remember that the conflict of two psychic factors, which we— 
roughly—call the repressed unconscious and the conscious, dominates our lives, and that 
the resistance against the interpretation of dreams, the hall-mark of the 
dream-censorship, is none other than the repression-resistance which keeps these two 
factors apart. You also know that, under certain conditions, other psychological 
formations emerge from the conflict between these same factors, formations which are the 
result of compromises just as dreams are; and you will not require me to repeat all that 
is involved in my introduction to the theory of the neuroses in order to put before you 
what we know about the conditions under which such compromise formations come about. You 
will have realized that the dream is a pathological product, the first member of the 
series which includes the hysterical symptom, the obsession, and the delusion among its 
members; it is differentiated from the others by its transitoriness and by the fact that 
it occurs under conditions which are part of normal life. For we must never forget that 
the dream-life is, as Aristotle has already told us, the way our mind works during sleep. 
The state of sleep represents a turning away from the real external world, and thus 
provides a necessary condition for the development of a psychosis. The most penetrating 
study of serious cases of psychosis will reveal no characteristic which is more typical 
of these pathological conditions. In psychoses, however, the turning away from reality is 
brought about in two ways; either because the repressed unconscious is too strong, so 
that it overwhelms the conscious, which tries to cling on to reality, or because reality 
has become so unbearably painful that the threatened ego, in a despairing gesture of 
opposition, throws itself into the arms of the unconscious impulses. The harmless, 
dream-psychosis is the result of a consciously willed, and only temporary, withdrawal 
from the external world; it ceases to operate when relations with the external world are 
resumed. While the sleeper is isolated, there is an alteration in the distribution of his 
psychic energy; part of the repressive expenditure, which is otherwise used to keep down 
the unconscious, can be saved, for if the unconscious makes use of its relative freedom 
and enters on some activity, it finds the avenue to motor expression stopped up, and only 
the innocent outlet of hallucinatory satisfaction open to it. It can now, therefore, form 
a dream, but the, fact of dream-censorship shows that enough repressive resistance 
remains operative even during sleep.

54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, esp 813d-814b
In what follows, I cannot avoid making my exposition a schematic one. Supposing we have 
before us in a given instance all the latent thoughts, more or less affectively toned, 
which have taken the place of the manifest dream after a complete interpretation. We 
shall then notice a distinction among them, and this distinction will take us a long way. 
Almost all these dream-thoughts will be recognized or acknowledged by the dreamer; he 
will admit that he thought thus at. one time or another, or that he might very well have 
done so. But he may resist the acceptation of one single thought, it is foreign to him, 
perhaps even repellent; it may be that he will passionately repudiate it. Now it becomes 
clear to us that the other thoughts are bits of his conscious, or, more correctly, of his 
pre-conscious thought; they might very well have been thought during waking life, and 
have probably formed themselves during the day. This one rejected thought, or, better, 
this one impulse, is a child of the night; it belongs to the unconscious of the dreamer, 
and is therefore disowned and repudiated by him. It had to await the nightly relaxation 
of re pression in order to achieve any sort of expression. In any case, the expression 
that it obtains is enfeebled, distorted, and disguised; without the work of 
interpretation we should never have discovered it. It is thanks to its connection with 
the other unobjectionable dream thoughts that this unconscious impulse has had the 
opportunity of slipping past the barrier of the censorship in an unostentatious disguise; 
on the other hand, the pre-conscious dream thoughts owe to the same connection their 
power of occupying the mental life, even during sleep. We can, indeed, have no doubt 
about this: the unconscious impulse is the real creator of the dream, it provides the 
psychic energy required for its formation. Just like any other instinctual impulse it can 
do no other than seek its own satisfaction, and our experience in dream-interpretation 
shows us, moreover, that this is the meaning of all dreaming. In every dream an 
instinctual wish is displayed as fulfilled. The nightly cutting-off of mental life from 
reality, and the regression to primitive mechanisms which it makes possible, enable this 
desired instinctual satisfaction to be experienced in a hallucinatory fashion as actually 
happening. On account of the same process of regression, ideas are turned into visual 
pictures in the dream; the latent dream-thoughts are, that is to say, dramatized and 
illustrated.
From this piece of dream-work we obtain information about some of the most striking and 
peculiar characteristics of the dream. Let me repeat the stages of dream-formation. The 
introduction: the wish to sleep, the voluntary withdrawal from the outside world. Two 
things follow from this: firstly, the possibility for older and more primitive modes of 
activity to manifest themselves, i.e., regression; and, secondly, the decrease of the 
repression-resistance which weighs on the unconscious. As a result of this latter 
feature, an opportunity for dream formation presents itself, which is seized upon by the 
factors which are the occasion of the dream; that is to say, the internal and external 
stimuli which are in activity. The dream which thus eventuates is already a 
compromise-formation; it has a double function: it is on the one hand in conformity with 
the ego (egosyntonic), since it subserves the wish to sleep by draining off the stimuli 
which would other wise disturb it, while on the other hand it allows to a repressed 
impulse the satisfaction which is possible in these circumstances in the form of an 
hallucinatory wish-fulfilment. The whole process of dream-formation, which is permitted 
by the sleeping ego, is, however, under the control of the censorship, a control which is 
exercised by what is left of the forces of repression. I cannot explain the process more 
simply; it is not in itself simpler than that. But now I can proceed with the description 
of the dream-work.
Let us go back once more to the latent dream-thoughts. Their dominating element is the 
repressed impulse, which has obtained some kind of expression, toned down and disguised 
though it may be, by associating itself with stimuli which happen to be there and by 
tacking itself on the residue of the day before. Just like any other impulse this one 
presses forward toward satisfaction in action, but the path to motor discharge is closed 
to it on account of the physiological characteristics of the state of - sleep, and so it 
is forced to travel in the retrograde direction to perception, and content itself with an 
hallucinatory satisfaction. The latent dream-thoughts are therefore turned into a 
collection of sensory images and visual scenes. As they are travelling in this direction 
something happens to them which seems to us new and bewildering. All the verbal apparatus 
by means of which the more subtle thought-relations are expressed, the conjunctions and 
prepositions, the variations of declension and conjugation, are lacking, because the 
means of portraying them are absent: just as in primitive, grammarless speech, only the 
raw material of thought can be expressed, and the abstract is merged again in the 
concrete from which it sprang. What is left over may very well seem to lack coherence. It 
is as much the result of the archaic regression in the mental apparatus as of the demands 
of: the. censorship that so much use is made of the representation of certain objects and 
processes by means of symbols which have become strange to conscious thought. But of more 
far-reaching import are the other alterations to which the elements comprising the 
dream-thoughts are subjected. Such of them as have any point of contact are condensed 
into new unities. When the thoughts are translated into pictures, those forms are 
indubitably preferred which allow of this kind of telescoping, or condensation; it is as 
though a force were at work which subjected the material to a process of pressure or 
squeezing together. As a result of condensation, one element in a manifest dream may 
correspond to a number of elements of the dream-thoughts; but, conversely, one of the 
elements from among the dream-thoughts may be represented by a number of pictures in the 
dream.

