6b. The symbolism of apparently normal acts: forgetting, verbal slips, errors
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 13a-c / General Introduction, 453b- 476a,c esp 467d-468a; 546b-547a / New
Introductory Lectures, 852a-b
6b. The symbolism of apparently normal acts: forgetting, verbal slips, errors
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 13a-c / General Introduction, 453b-
476a,c esp 467d-468a; 546b-547a / New Introductory Lectures, 852a-b
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 13a-c

                                                           SECOND LECTURE

Ladies and Gentlemen: At about the same time that Breuer was using the "talking-cure" with his patient, M. Charcot began in Paris,
with the hystericals of the Salpetriere, those re searches which were to lead to a new understanding of the disease. These results
were, however, not yet known in Vienna. But when about ten years later Breuer and I published our preliminary communication on
the psychic mechanism of hysterical phenomena, which grew out of the cathartic treatment of Breuer's first patient, we were both of
us under the spell of Charcot's investigations. We made the pathogenic experiences of our patients, which acted as psychic traumata,
equivalent to those physical traumata whose influence on hysterical paralyses Charcot had determined; and Breuer's hypothesis of
hypnoidal states is itself only an echo of the fact that Charcot had artificially reproduced those traumatic paralyses in hypnosis.

The great French observer, whose student I was during the years 1885-86, had no natural bent for, creating psychological. theories.
His student, P. Janet, was the first to attempt to penetrate more deeply into the psychic processes of hysteria, and we followed his
example, when we made the mental splitting and the dissociation of personality the central points of our theory. Janet propounds a
theory of hysteria which draws upon the principal theories of heredity and degeneration which are current in France. According to
his view, hysteria is a form of degenerative alteration of the nervous system, manifesting itself in a congenital weakness of the
function of psychic synthesis. The hysterical patient is from the start incapable of correlating and unifying the manifold of his mental
processes, and so there arises the tendency to mental dissociation. If you will permit me to use a banal but clear illustration, Janet's
hysterical reminds one of a weak woman who has been shopping, and is now on her way home, laderr with: packages and bundles of
every description. She cannot manage the whole lot with her two arms and her ten fingers, and soon she drops one. When she
stoops to pick this up, another breaks loose, and so it goes on.

Now it does not agree very well with this assumed mental weakness of hystericals that there can be observed in hysterical cases, be
sides the phenomena of lessened functioning, examples of a partial increase of functional capacity, as a sort of compensation. At the
time when Breuer's patient had forgotten her mother-tongue and all other languages save English, her control of English attained
such a level that if a German book was put before her she could give a fluent, perfect translation of its contents at sight. When later I
undertook to continue on my own account the investigations begun by Breuer, I soon came to another view of the origin of hysterical
dissociation (or splitting of consciousness). It was inevitable that my views should diverge widely and radically, for my point of
departure was not, like that of Janet, laboratory researches, but attempts at therapy. Above everything else, it was practical needs
that urged me on. The cathartic treatment, as Breuer had made use of it, presupposed that the patient should be put in deep
hypnosis, for only in hypnosis was available the knowledge of his pathogenic associations which were unknown to him in his normal
state. Now hypnosis, as a fanciful, and so to speak, mystical, aid, I soon came to dislike; and when I discovered that, in spite of all my
efforts, I could not hypnotize by any means all of my patients, I resolved to give up hypnotism and to make the cathartic method
independent of it.

Since I could not alter the psychic state of most of my patients at my wish, I directed my efforts to working with them in their normal
state. This seems at first sight to be a particularly senseless and aimless undertaking. The problem was this: to find out something
from the patient that the doctor did not know and the patient himself did not know. How could one hope to make such a method
succeed? The memory of a very noteworthy and instructive proceeding came to my aid, which I had seen in Bernheim's clinic at
Nancy. Bernheim showed us that persons put in a condition of hypnotic somnambulism, and subjected to all sorts of experiences,
had only apparently lost the memory of those somnambulic experiences, and that their memory of them could be awakened even in
the normal state. If he asked them about their experiences during somnambulism, they said at first that they did not remember, but
if he persisted, urged, assured them that they did know, then every time the forgotten memory came back.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, 453b- 476a,c

But in psycho-analysis, unfortunately, all this is different In psycho-analytic treatment nothing happens but an exchange of words
between the patient and the physician. The patient talks, tells of his past experiences and present impressions, complains, and
expresses his wishes and his emotions. The physician listens, attempts to direct the patient's thought-processes, reminds him, forces
his attention in certain directions, gives him explanations and observes the reactions of understanding or denial thus evoked. The
patient's unenlightened relatives—people of a kind to be impressed only by something visible and tangible, preferably by the sort of
action that may be seen at a cinema—never omit to express their doubts of how "mere talk can possibly cure anybody." Their
reasoning is of course as illogical as it is inconsistent. For they are the same people who are always convinced that the sufferings of
neurotics are purely "in their own imagination." Words and magic were in the beginning one and the same thing, and even today
words retain muck of their magical power. By words one of us can give to another the greatest happiness or bring about utter
despair; by words the teacher imparts his knowledge to the student; by words the orator sweeps his audience with him and
determines its judgments and decisions. Words call forth emotions and are universally the means by which we influence our fellow-
creatures. Therefore let us not despise the use of words in psycho-therapy and let us be content if we may overhear the words which
pass between the analyst and the patient.

But even that is impossible. The dialogue which constitutes the analysis will admit of no audience; the process cannot be
demonstrated. One could, of course, exhibit a neurasthenic or hysterical patient to students at a psychiatric lecture. He would relate
his case and his symptoms, but nothing more. He will make the communications necessary to the analysis only under the conditions
of a special affective relationship to tie physician; in the presence of a single person to whom he was indifferent he would become
mute. For these communications relate to all his most private thoughts and feelings, all that which as a socially independent person
he must hide from others, all that which, being foreign to his own conception of himself, he tries to conceal even from himself.

It is impossible, therefore, for you to be actually present during a psycho-analytic treatment; you can only be told about it, and can
learn psycho-analysis, in the strictest sense of the word, only by hearsay. This tuition at second hand, so to say, puts you in a very
unusual and difficult position as regards forming your own judgment on the subject, which will therefore largely depend on the
reliance you can place on your informant.

Now imagine for a moment that you were present at a lecture in history instead of in psychiatry, and that the lecturer was dealing
with the life and conquests of Alexander the Great. What reason would you have to believe what he told you? The situation would
appear at first sight even more unsatisfactory than in the case of psycho-analysis, for the professor of history had no more part in
Alexander's, campaigns than you yourselves; the psycho-analyst at least informs you of matters in which he himself has played a part.
But then we come to| the question of what evidence there is to support the historian. He can refer you to the accounts of early
writers who were either contemporaries or who lived not long after the events in question, such as Diodorus, Plutarch, Arrian, and
others; he can lay before you reproductions of the preserved coins and statues of the king, and pass round a photograph of the
mosaic at Pompeii representing the battle at Issus. Yet, strictly speaking, all these documents only prove that the existence of
Alexander and the reality of his deeds were already believed in by former generations of men, and your criticism might begin anew at
this point.

And then you would find that not everything reported of Alexander is worthy of belief or sufficiently authenticated in detail, but I can
hardly suppose that you would leave the lecture Toom in doubt altogether as to the. Reality of Alexander the Great. Your conclusions
would be principally determined by two considerations: first, that the lecturer could have no conceivable motive for attempting to
persuade you of something which he did not himself believe to be true, and secondly, that all the available authorities agree more or
less in their accounts of the facts. In questioning the accuracy of the early writers you would apply these tests again, the possible
motives of the authors and the agreement to be found between them. The result of such tests would certainly be convincing in the
case of Alexander, probably less so in regard to figures like Moses and Nimrod. Later on you will perceive clearly enough what doubts
can be raised against the credibility of an exponent of psycho-analysis.

Now you will have a right to ask the question: "If no objective evidence for psycho analysis exists and no possibility of demonstrating
the process, how is it possible to study it at all or to convince oneself of its truth?" The study of it is indeed not an easy matter, nor
are there many people who have thoroughly learned it; still, there is, of course, some way of learning it. Psycho-analysis is learnt first
of all on oneself, through the study of one's own personality. This is not exactly what is meant by introspection, but it may be so
described for want of a better word. There is a whole series of very common and well-known mental phenomena which can be taken
as material for self-analysis when one has acquired some knowledge of the method. In this way one may obtain the required
conviction of the reality of the processes which psycho-analysis describes, and of the truth of its conceptions, although progress on
these lines is not without its limitations. One gets much further by submitting oneself to analysis by a skilled analyst, undergoing the
working of the analysis in one's own person and using the opportunity to observe the finer details of the technique which the analyst
employs. This, eminently the best way, is of course only practicable for individuals and cannot be used in a class of students.

The second difficulty you will find in connection with psycho-analysis is not, on the other hand, inherent in it, but is one for which I
must hold you yourselves responsible, at least in so far as your medical studies have influenced you. Your training will have induced
in you an attitude of mind very far removed from the psycho-analytical one. You have been trained to establish the functions and
disturbances of the organism on an anatomical basis, to explain them in terms of chemistry and physics, and to regard them from a
biological point of view; but no part of your interest has ever been directed to the mental aspects of life, in which, after all, the
development of the marvellously complicated organism culminates. For this rea son a psychological attitude of mind is still foreign to
you, and you are accustomed to regard it with suspicion, to deny it a scientific status, and to leave it to the general public, poets,
mystics, and philosophers. Now this limitation in you is undoubtedly detrimental to your medical efficiency; for on meeting a patient
it is the mental aspects with which one first comes into contact, as in most human relationships, and I am afraid you will pay the
penalty of having to yield a part of the curative influence at which you aim to the quacks, mystics, and faith-healers whom you
despise.

I quite acknowledge that there is an excuse for this defect in your previous training. There is no auxiliary philosophical science that
might be of service to you in your profession. Neither speculative philosophy nor descriptive psychology, nor even the so-called
experimental psychology which is studied in connection with the physiology of the sense-organs, as they are taught in the schools,
can tell you anything useful of the relations existing between mind and body, or can give you a key to comprehension of a possible
disorder of the mental functions. It is true that the psychiatric branch of medicine occupies itself with describing the different forms
of recognizable mental disturbances and grouping them in clinical pictures, but in their best moments psychiatrists themselves are
doubtful whether their purely descriptive formulations deserve to be called science. The origin, mechanism, and interrelation of the
symptoms which make up these clinical pictures are undiscovered: either they cannot be correlated with any demonstrable changes
in the brain, or only with such changes as in no way explain them. These mental disturbances are open to therapeutic influence only
when they can be identified as secondary effects of some organic disease.

This is the lacuna which psycho-analysis is striving to fill. It hopes to provide psychiatry with the missing psychological foundation, to
discover the common ground on which a correlation! of bodily and mental disorder becomes comprehensible. To this end it must
dissociate itself from every foreign preconception, whether anatomical^ chemical, or physiological, and must work throughout with
conceptions-of a purely psychological order, and for this very reason I fear that it will appear-strange to you at first.

For the next difficulty I-shall not hold you, your training or your mental attitude, responsible. There are two tenets of psycho-analysis
which offend the whole, world and excite its resentment; the one conflicts with intellectual, the other with moral and aesthetic
prejudices. Let us not underestimate these prejudices; they -are powerful things, residues of valuable, even necessary, stages in
human evolution. They are maintained by emotional forces, and the fight against them is a hard one;

The first of these displeasing propositions of psycho-analysis is this: that mental processes are essentially unconscious, and that
those which are conscious are merely isolated acts and parts of the whole psychic entity, Now I must ask you to remember that, on
the contrary, we are accustomed to identify the mental with the conscious. Consciousness appears to us as positively the
characteristic that defines mental life, and we regard psychology as the study of the content of consciousness. This even appears so
evident that any contradiction of it seems obvious nonsense to us, and yet it is impossible for psycho-analysis to avoid this
contradiction, or to accept the identity between the conscious and the psychic. The psycho-analytical definition of tie mind is that it
comprises processes of the nature of feeling, thinking, and wishing, and. it maintains that there are such things as unconscious
thinking and unconscious wishing. But in doing so psycho analysis has forfeited at the outset the sympathy of the sober and
scientifically minded, and incurred the suspicion of being a phantastic cult occupied with dark and unfathomable mysteries; You
yourselves must find it difficult to understand why I should stigmatize an abstract proposition, such as "The; psychic is the conscious,"
as a prejudice; nor can you guess yet what evolutionary process could have led to the denial of the unconscious, if it does indeed
exist,, nor what advantage could -have been achieved by this denial. It seems like an empty wrangle over: words to argue whether
mental life is to be regarded as co-extensive with consciousness or whether it may be-said to stretch beyond this limit, and yet I can
assure you that the acceptance of unconscious mental processes represents a decisive step towards a hew orientation in the world
and in science.

As little can you suspect how close is the connection between this first bold step on the part of psycho-analysis and the second to
which I am how coming. For this next proposition, which we: put forward as one of the discoveries of psycho-analysis, consists in the
assertion that impulses; which can only! be described as sexual in both the narrower and the wider sense, play a peculiarly large
part, never before sufficiently appreciated, in the causation of nervous and mental disorders. Nay, more, that these sexual impulses
have contributed invaluably to the highest cultural, artistic; and social achievements of the human mind.

In my opinion^ it is the aversion from this conclusion of psycho analytic investigation that is; the most significant source of the
opposition it has encountered. Are you curious to know how we ourselves account for this? We believe that civilization has been
built up, under the pressure of the struggle for existence, by sacrifices in gratification of the primitive impulses, and that it is to a
great extent forever being re-created, as each individual, successively joining the community, repeats the sacrifice of his instinctive
pleasures for the common good. The sexual are amongst the most important of the instinctive forces thus utilized: they are in this
way sublimated, that is to say, their energy is turned aside from its sexual goal and diverted towards other ends, no longer sexual and
socially more valuable. But the structure thus built up is insecure, for the sexual Impulses are with difficulty controlled; in each-
individual who takes up his part in the work of civilization there is a danger that a rebellion of the sexual impulses may occur, against
this diversion of their energy. Society can conceive of no more powerful menace to its culture than would arise from the liberation of
the sexual impulses and a return of them to theirs original goal. Therefore, society dislikes this sensitive place in its development
being touched-upon; that the power of the sexual instinct :should be recognized,; and the significance of the individual's sexual fife
revealed, is very far from its interests; with a view to discipline, it has gather taken the course of diverting attention away from this
whole field. For this reason, the revelations of psycho-analysis are not tolerated by it, and it would greatly prefer to brand them as
aesthetically offensive^ morally reprehensible, or dangerous. But since such objections are not valid arguments against conclusions
which claim to represent the objective results of scientific investigation, the opposition must be translated into intellectual terms
before it can be expressed. It is a characteristic of human nature to be inclined to regard anything which is disagreeable as untrue,
and then without much difficulty to find arguments against it. So society pronounces the unacceptable to be untrue, disputes the
results of psycho-analysis with logical: and concrete arguments, arising, however, in affective sources, and clings to them with all the
strength of prejudice against every attempt at refutation.

But we, on the other hand, claim to have yielded to no tendency in propounding this objectionable theory. Our intention has been
solely to give recognition to the facts as we found them in the course of painstaking researches. And we now claim the right to reject
unconditionally any such introduction of practical considerations into the field of scientific investigation, even before we have
determined whether the apprehension which attempts to force these considerations upon us is justified or not.

These, now, are some of the difficulties which confront you at the outset when you begin to take an interest in psycho-analysis. It is
probably more than enough for a beginning. If you can overcome their discouraging effect, we will proceed further.

                                                             SECOND LECTURE

                                                         The Psychology of Errors

We shall now begin, not with postulates, but with an investigation. For this purpose we shall select certain phenomena which are
very frequent, very familiar and much overlooked, and which have nothing to do with illness, since they may be observed in every
healthy person. I refer to the errors that everyone commits: as when anyone wishes to say a certain thing but uses the wrong word
(slip of the tongue); or when the same sort of mistake is made in writing (slip of the pen), in which case one may or may not notice it;
or when anyone reads in print or writing something other than what is actually before him (misreading); or when anyone mis-hears
what is said to him, naturally when there is no question of any disease of the auditory sense-organ. Another series of such
phenomena are those based on forgetting some thing temporarily, though not permanently; as, for instance, when anyone cannot
think of a name which he knows quite well and is always able to recognize' whenever he sees it; or when anyone forgets to carry out
some intention, which he afterwards remembers, and has there fore forgotten only for a certain time. This element of transitoriness
is lacking in a third class, of which mislaying things so that they cannot be found is an example. This is a kind of forgetfulness which
we regard differently from the usual kind; one is amazed or annoyed at it, in stead of finding it comprehensible. Allied to this are
certain mistakes, in which the temporary element is again noticeable, as when one believes something for a time which both before
and afterwards one knows to be untrue, and a number of similar manifestations which we know under various names.

Some inner relation between all these kinds of occurrences is indicated in German, by the use of the prefix ver which is common to
all the words designating them. These words almost all refer to acts of an unimportant kind, generally temporary and without much
significance in life. It is only rarely that anything of the kind, such as the loss of some object, attains any practical importance. For this
reason little attention is paid to such happenings and they arouse little feeling.

I am now going to ask you to consider these phenomena. But you will object, with annoyance: "There are so many tremendous
puzzles both in the wide world and in the narrower life of the soul, so many mysteries in the field of mental disorder which demand
and deserve explanation, that it really seems frivolous to waste labour and interest on these trifles. If you could explain to us how it
is possible for any one with sound sight and hearing, in broad day light, to see and hear things which do not exist, Or how anyone can
suddenly believe that his nearest and dearest are persecuting him, or can justify with the most ingenious arguments a delusion which
would seem nonsensical to any child, then we might be willing to take psycho analysis seriously. But if psycho-analysis cannot occupy
us with anything more interesting than the question why a speaker uses a wrong word or why a Hausfrau mislays her keys and similar
trivialities, then we shall find something better to do with our time and our interest."
My reply is: Patience! Your criticism is not on the right track. It is true that psycho-analysis cannot boast that it has never occupied it
self with trifles. On the contrary, the material of its observations is usually those common place occurrences which have been cast
aside as all top insignificant by other sciences, the refuse, so to speak, of the phenomenal world. But in your criticism are you not
confounding the magnitude of a problem with the conspicuous nature of its manifestations? Is it not possible under certain
conditions and at certain times, for very important things to betray themselves in very flight indications? I could easily cite many
instances of this. What slight signs, for instance^ convey to the young men in my audience that they have gained a lady's favour? Do
they expect an explicit declaration, a passionate embrace, or are they not content with a glance which is almost imperceptible to
others, a fleeting gesture, a handshake prolonged by a second? Or suppose you are a detective engaged in the investigation of a
murder, do you actually expect to find that the murderer will leave his photograph with name and ad dress on the scene of the
crime? Are you not perforce content with slighter and less certain traces of the person you seek? So let us not under-value small
signs: perhaps from them it may be possible to come upon the tracks Of greater things. Besides,. I think as you do that the larger
problems of the world and of science have the first claim on our interest. But on the whole it avails little to form a definite resolution
to devote oneself to the investigation of this or that great problem. One is then often at a loss how to set about the next step. In
scientific work it is more profitable to take up what ever lies before one whenever a path towards its exploration presents itself. And
then, if one carries it through thoroughly, without prejudice or pre-conceptions, one may, with good for tune and by virtue of the
interrelationship linking each thing to every other (hence, also, the small to the great), find, even in the course of such humble
labour, a road to the study of the great problems.

It is from this point of view that I hope to enlist your interest in considering the apparently trivial errors made by normal people. I
propose now that we question someone who has no -knowledge of psycho-analysis as to how he explains these occurrences.

His first answer is sure to be: "Oh, they are not worth any explanation; they are little accidents." What does the man mean by this?
Does he mean to maintain that there are any occurrences so small that they fail to come within the causal sequence of things, that
they might as well be other than they are? Anyone thus breaking away from the determination of natural phenomena, at any single
point, has thrown over the whole scientific outlook on the world (Weltanschauung): One may point out to him how much more
.consistent is the religious out look on the world, which emphatically assures us that "not one sparrow' shall fall to the ground"
except God wills it. I think our friend would not be willing to follow his first answer to its logical conclusion; he would give way and
say that if he were to study these things he would soon .find some explanation of them. It must be a matter of slight functional
disturbances, of inaccuracies of mental performance, the conditions of which could be discovered. A man who otherwise speaks
correctly may make a slip of the tongue, (i) when he is tired or unwell, (2) when he is excited, or (3) when his attention is
concentrated on something else. It is easy to confirm this. Slips of the tongue do indeed occur most frequently when one is tired, or
has a headache, or feels an attack of migraine coming on- Forgetting proper names very often occurs in these circumstances; many
people are habitually warned of the onset of an attack of migraine by the inability to recall proper names. In excitement, too, one
mixes up words or even things, one performs actions erroneously; and the forgetting of intentions, as well as a number of other
undesigned acts, comes to the fore when one is distracted, in other words, when the attention is concentrated on other things. A
familiar instance of such distraction is the professor in Fliegende Blatter who for gets his umbrella and takes the wrong hat, because
he is thinking of the problems which are to be the subject of his next book. We all know from our own experience how one can
forget to carryout intentions or promises when something has happened in the interval that absorbs one very deeply.

This seems so entirely comprehensible and also irrefutable. It is perhaps not very interesting or not so much so as we expected. Let
us[ look at this explanation of errors more closely. The various conditions which have been cited; as necessary for the occurrence of
these phenomena are not all similar in kind. Illness and disorders of the circulation afford a physiological basis for an affection of the
normal functions ; excitement, tiredness, and distraction are conditions of a different kind which could be described as psycho-
physiological. These last could easily be converted into a theory., Fatigue, as well as distraction, and perhaps also general excitement,
cause a dissipation of the attention from which it may follow that the act in question has insufficient attention devoted to it. It can
then very easily be disturbed and inexactly performed. Slight illness or a change in the distribution of blood in the central organ of
the nervous system can have the same effect, by these conditions affecting the determining factor, the distribution of attention, in a
similar way. In all cases it would be a question of the effects of a disturbance of the attention from organic or psychical causes.

But all this doesn't seem to promise much of interest for a psycho-analytic investigation. We might feel tempted to give up the topic.
To be sure, a closer inspection of the facts shows that they are not all in accord with the attention theory of errors of this sort, or at
least that not everything can be directly deduced from it. We find that such errors and such forgetfulness also take place when
people are not fatigued or excited, but are in every way in their normal condition; unless, just because of the errors, we were
subsequently to attribute to them a condition of excitement which they themselves did not acknowledge. Nor can the matter be
quite so simple as that the successful performance of an act will be ensured by an intensification of attention, or endangered by a
diminution of it. For a great number of actions may be carried out in a purely automatic way with very little attention and yet quite
successfully. In walking, a man may perhaps scarcely know where he is going but keep to the right road and stop at his destination
without having gone astray. At least, this is what usually happens. A practised pianist strikes the right notes, without thinking of
them. He may of course also make an occasional mis take, but if automatic playing increased the danger of errors the virtuoso,
whose constant practice has made his playing entirely automatic, would be the most exposed to this danger. Yet we see, on the
contrary, that many acts are most successfully carried out when they are not the objects of particularly concentrated attention, and
that mistakes may occur just on occasions when one is most eager to be accurate, that is, when a. distraction of the necessary
attention is most certainly not present. One could then say that this is the effect of the excitement, but we do not understand why
the excitement does not rather intensify the concentration on the end so much desired. So that if in an important speech anyone
says the opposite of what he intends, it can hardly be explained according to the psycho-physiological or the attention theory.

There are also many other minor features in connection with these errors which we do not understand and which are not rendered
more comprehensible by these explanations, For instance, when one has temporarily forgotten a name one is annoyed, one is
determined to recall it and cannot desist from the attempt. Why is it that despite this annoyance the person so often cannot
succeed, as he wishes, in directing his attention to the word which, as he says, is "on the tip of his tongue," and which he instantly
recognizes when it is supplied to him? Or, to take another example, there are cases in which the errots multiply, link themselves
together or act as substitutes for one another. The first time, one forgets an appointment; the next time, after having made a special
resolution not to forget it, one discovers that one has made a mistake in the day or hour. Or one tries by devious ways to remember a
forgotten word, and in the course of so doing loses track of a second name which would have been of use in finding the first. If one
then pursues the second name, a third gets lost, and so on. It is notorious that the same thing happens with misprints, which are of
course errors on the part of the compositor. A stubborn error of this sort is said once to have crept into a Social-Democratic
newspaper, where, in the account of a festivity, the following words were printed: "Amongst those present was His Highness, the
Clown Prince." The next day a correction was attempted. The paper apologized and said: "The sentence should of course have read;
'the Crow-Prince.' " Again, in a war-correspondent's account of meeting a famous general whose infirmities were pretty well known,
a reference to the general was printed as "this battle-scared veteran." Next day an apology appeared which read "the words of
course should have been the bottle-scarred veteran!'"¹ We like to attribute these occurrences to a devil in the type setting machine
or to some malevolent goblin—figurative expressions which at least imply something more than a psycho-physiological theory of the
misprint.

I do not know if you are aware of the fact that slips of the tongue can be provoked, called forth by suggestion, as it were. An
anecdote will serve to illustrate this. Once when a novice on the stage was entrusted with the important part in The Maid of Orleans
of announcing to the King: "The Constable sends back his sword," the principal player, during the rehearsal, played the joke of several
times repeating to the timid beginner, instead of the
¹English example.—TR.

text, the following: “The Komfortabel send back his steed."¹ At the: performance the unfortunate actor actually made his debut with
this perverse announcement, though he had been amply warned against so doing, or perhaps just because he had been.

All these: little characteristics of errors are not much illuminated by the theory of diverted attention. But that does not necessarily
prove the theory wrong. There may be something missing, a link, by the addition of which the theory, might be made .completely
satisfactory. But many of the errors themselves can be considered from another, aspect.

Let us select slips of the tongue, as the type of error best suited to our purpose. We might equally well choose slips of the pen or of
reading. Now we must first remind ourselves that, so, far, we have only enquired when and under what conditions the wrong word is
said, and have received an answer on that point only. Interest may be directed elsewhere, though, and the question raised why just
this particular slip is made and no other: one can consider the nature of the mistake. You will see that so long as this question
remains unanswered, and, the eject of the mistake is not explained, the phenomenon remains a pure accident on the psychological
side, even if a physiological explanation has been found for it. When it happens that I make a mistake in a word I could obviously do
this in an infinite number of ways, in place of the right word substitute any one of a thousand others, or make in numerable
distortions of the right word. Now, is there anything which forces upon me in a specific instance just this one special slip, out of all
those which are possible^ or does that remain accidental and arbitrary, and can nothing rational be found in answer to this question?

Two authors, Meringer and Mayer (a philologist and a psychiatrist) did indeed in 1895 make an attempt to approach the problem of
slips of the tongue from this side. They collected examples and first treated them from a purely descriptive standpoint. This of course
does;, not yet furnish any explanation, but it may lead the way to one. They differentiated the distortions which the intended phrase
suffered through the slip into: interchanges (in the positions of words, syllables or letters), anticipations, perseverations,
compoundings (contaminations), and substitutions. I will give
¹Komfortabel is a slang Viennese expression for a one-horse cab.—TR.

you examples of these authors’ main categories. As an instance of an interchange (in the position of words) someone might say "The
Milo of Venus'' instead of "The Venus of Milo." The well-known slip of the hotel-boy who, knocking at the bishop's door, nervously
replied to the question "Who is it?" "The Lord, my boy!" is another example of such an inter change in the position of words.² In the
typical Spoonerism, the position of certain letters is interchanged, as when the preacher said: "How often do we feel a half-warmed
fish within us!"² It is a case of anticipation if any one says: "The thought lies heartily ..." instead of: "The thought lies heavily on my
heart." A perseveration is illustrated by the well-known ill-fated toast, "Gentlemen, I call upon (auf) you to

hiccough (=aufzustossen)

(auf) to the health of our Chief."

(drink) (== anzustossen)

And when a member of the House of Com mons referred to another as the "honourable member for Central Hell," instead of "Hull,"
it was a case of perseveration; as also when a soldier said to a friend "I wish there were a thousand of our men mortified on that hill,
Bill," instead of "fortified." In one case the ell sound has perseverated from the previous words "member for Central,' and in the
other thkm sound in"men" has perseverated to form "mortified."² These three types of slip are not very common. You will find those
cases much more frequent in which the slip happens by a compounding or contraction, as for example when a gentleman asks a lady
if he may insert her on her. way (begleit-digen); this contraction is made up of begleiten=to escort, and beleidigen=to insult. (And by
the way, a young man addressing a lady in this way will not have much success with her.) A substitution takes place when a poor
woman says she has an "incurable infernal disease,"² or in Mrs. Malaprop's mind when she says, for instance, "few gentlemen know
how to value the ineffectual qualities in a, woman."²

The -explanation which the two authors attempt to formulate as the basis of their collection of examples is peculiarly inadequate.
They hold; that the sounds- and syllables of a word have different values and that the innervation of the sounds of higher Value can
interfere with those of lower value. They obviously base this conclusion on the cases of
²English examples.—TR.

anticipation and perseveration which are not at all frequent; in other forms of slips of the tongue the question of such sound
priorities, even if they exist, does not enter at all; for the most frequent type of slip is that in which in stead of a certain word one
says another which resembles it, and this resemblance is considered by many people sufficient explanation of it. For instance, a
professor may say in his opening lecture, "I am not inclined (geneigt instead of geeignet=fitted) to estimate the merits of my
predecessor." Or another professor says, "In the case of the female genital, in spite of the tempting ... I mean, the attempted ..."
(Versuchungen instead;of Versuche).

The commonest, and also the most noticeable form of slip of the tongue, however, is that of saying the exact opposite of what one
meant to say, These cases; are quite outside the effect of any relations between sounds or confusion due to similarity, and in default
one may there fore turn to the fact that opposites have a strong conceptual connection with one another and are psychologically
very closely associated; There are well-known examples of this sort. For instance, the President of our Parliament once opened the.
session with the words "Gentlemen, I declare a quorum present and herewith declare the session. closed."

Any other common association may work in a way as insidious as the, association of opposites and may on occasion lead to results as
inopportune. So there is a story :to the effect that, at a festivity in honour of the marriage of a child of H. Helmholtz with a child of
the well-known inventor and captain of industry, W. Siemens, "the famous physiologist Dubois- Reymond was asked to speak. He
concluded his doubtless brilliant speech with the toast "Success to the new partnership, Siemens and Halske!" which was of course
the name of the old firm. The association of the two -names must have been as familiar to a resident in: Berlin as "Cross & Blackwell"
to a Londoner.

So the effect of word-associations must be taken into account, as well as that of sound values and similarities between words. But
even that is not enough; In one type: of case, before we can arrive at an adequate explanation of the slip we must consider some
phrase which had been said, Or perhaps only thought, previously. Again, that is, a case pf perseveration, as Meringer insists, but
arising in a more distant source.—I must confess that altogether I have the impression that we are further than ever from
comprehension of slips of the tongue.

However, I hope-1 am not mistaken In thinking that in the course of our examination of the above examples an impression has
formed itself in us which may be of a kind to repay further attention. We were considering the general conditions under which slips
of the tongue occur and then the influences which determine the kind of distortion effected in the slip, but so far we have not
examined at all the result of the slip itself, as an object of interest, without regard to its origin. If we bring ourselves to do this we'
shall in the end have to assert courageously, that in some of the examples the slip itself makes sense. Now what does it mean when
we say "it makes sense"? Well, it means that the result of the slip may perhaps have a right to. be regarded in- itself as a valid mental
process following out its own purpose, and as an expression having content and meaning. Hitherto we have only spoken of errors,
but now it appears as if the error could sometimes be quite a proper act, except that it; has intruded itself in the place of one more
expected or intended.

In certain cases the sense belonging to the slip itself appears obvious and unmistakable. When the President in his opening speech
closes the session of Parliament, a knowledge of the circumstances under which the slip was made, inclines us to see a meaning; in it
He expects no good result from the session and would be glad to be able to disperse -forthwith; there is no difficulty in discovering
the meaning, or interpreting the sense, of this slip. Or when a lady, appearing to compliment another, says "I am sure you must have
thrown this delightful hat together" instead of "sewn it together" (aufgepatzt instead of aufgeputzt), no scientific theories in the
world can prevent us from seeing: in her slip the thought that the hat is an amateur production. Or when a lady who is well known
for her determined character says: "My husband asked his doctor what sort of diet ought to be provided for him. But the doctor said
he needed no special diet, he could eat and drink whatever I choose," the slip appears clearly as the unmistakable expression of a
consistent scheme.

Now supposing it should turn out that not only a few cases of slips of the tongue and errors in general, but the great majority of
them, have a meaning, then the meaning of the error, to which we have hitherto paid no attention, would become the point of
greatest interest to us and would justifiably drive all other points of view into the background. All physiological and psycho-
physiological conditions could then be ignored and attention could be devoted to the purely psychological investigation of the sense,
that is, the meaning, the intention, in the errors. With this in view, therefore, we shall soon consider further material.

Before undertaking this, however, I should like to invite you to follow up another clue with me. It often happens that a poet makes
use of a slip of the tongue or some other error as a means of artistic expression. This fact in itself proves that he thinks the error, for
instance, a slip of the tongue, has a meaning; for he constructs it intentionally. It could hardly happen that a poet accidentally made a
slip of the pen and then allowed his slip of the pen to stand as a slip of the tongue of the character. He wishes to reveal something by
means of the slip and we may well enquire what that may be—whether perhaps he wishes to indicate that the person in question is
distracted or over tired, or is expecting a headache. Of course we should not exaggerate the importance of it if poets do make use of
slips to express their meaning. Slips might be in reality without meaning, accidents in the mental world, or only occasionally have a
meaning, and poets would still be entitled to refine them by infusing sense into them for their own purposes. How ever, it would not
be surprising if more were to be learned from poets about slips of the tongue-than from philologists and psychiatrists.

There is an example of a slip of this kind in Schiller's Wallenstein (Piccolomini, Act i, Scene 5). In the foregoing scene, young Max
Piccolomini had taken up Duke Wallenstein's cause ardently, and had been passionately describing the blessings of peace, which he
had become aware of in the course of a journey accompanying Wallenstein's beautiful daughter to the camp. As he leaves the stage,
his father (Octavio) and the courtier Questenberg are plunged in consternation. The fifth scene continues:

Questenberg. Alas 1 and stands it so?
Friend, do we let him go
In this delusion? let him go from us?
Not call him back at once, not
Open his eyes here and now?
Octavio (recovering himself out of deep thought).
He has now opened mine
And I see more than pleases me.
Questenberg. What is it?
Octavio. A curse upon this journey!
Questenberg. But why so? What is it?
Octavio. Come, come, friend! I must up


And follow the ill-omened clue at once
And see with mine own eyes—come with me now !
Questenberg. What now? Where go you then?
Octavio (hastily). To her, herselfI
Questenberg. To . . .
Octavio (corrects himself). To the Duke J Come, let us go.
Octavio meant to say: "To him, to the Duke," but his tongue slips and he betrays (to us, at least) by the words “to her" that he has
clearly recognized the influence at work behind the famous young warrior's rhapsodies in favour of peace.

A still more impressive example was found by O. Rank in Shakespeare. It occurs in the Merchant of Venice, in the famous scene in
which the fortunate suitor makes his choice among the three caskets; and I can perhaps not do better than read to you now Rank's
short account of it.

"A slip of the tongue which occurs in Shake speare's Merchant of Venice (Act m, Sc. 2) is exceedingly fine in the poetic feeling it
shows and in the brilliant way in which it is applied technically. Like the slip in Wallenstein quoted by Freud in his Psycho-pathology of
Everyday Life, it shows that the poets well understand the mechanism and meaning of such slips and assume that the audience will
also understand them. Portia, who by her father's wish has been bound to the choice of a husband by lot, has so far escaped all the
unwelcome suitors by the luck of fortune. Having at last found in Bassanio the suitor to whom she is inclined, she fears that he too
will choose the wrong casket. She would like to tell him that even so he may rest assured of her love, but she is prevented by her
oath. In this inner conflict the poet makes her say to her chosen suitor:

I pray you tarry; pause a day or two, |
Before you hazard: for, in choosing wrong,
I lose your company; therefore, forbear awhile:
There's something tells me (but it is not love)
I would not lose you ...
... I could teach you
How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;
So will I never be; so may you miss me;
But if you do you'll make me wish a sin,
That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
They have o'erlooked me, and divided me;
One half of me is yours, the other half yours,-
Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,
And so all yours.

Just that which she only meant to indicate subtly to him because she should really have concealed it from him altogether, namely,
that even before the lot she was his and loved him, this the poet with exquisite fineness of psycho logical feeling causes to come to
expression in her slip; and is able, by this artistic device, to relieve the unbearable uncertainty of the lover as well as the suspense of
the audience as to the issue of the choice."

And notice, at the end, how subtly Portia reconciles the two declarations which are contained in the slip, how she resolves the
contradiction between them, and finally even justifies the slip.

... but if mine, then yours, And so all yours.

It has happened that other thinkers outside the field of medicine have disclosed by an observation the meaning of some error and so
anticipated our efforts in this direction. You all know the witty satirist Lichtenberg (1742-1799) of whom Goethe said: "Where he
makes a joke, a problem lies concealed." And occasionally the solution of the problem is revealed in the joke. Lichtenberg writes in
his witty and satirical Notes, "He always read Agamemnon for angenommen (verb meaning to take for granted), so deeply versed
was he in Homer." This really contains the whole theory of slips in reading.

At the next lecture we will see whether we can agree with the poets in their conception of the meaning of psychological errors.

                                                             THIRD LECTURE

                                                  The Psychology op Errors (Continued)

At the last lecture it occurred to us to con sider the error by itself alone, apart from its relation to the intended act with which it had
interfered, and we perceived that in certain cases it seemed to betray a meaning of its own. We said to ourselves that if this
conclusion, that the error has its own meaning, could be established on a larger scale, that meaning would soon prove more
interesting to us than the investigation of the conditions under which errors arise.
Let us once more agree upon what we under stand by the meaning of a mental process. This is nothing else but the intention which
it serves and its place in a mental sequence. In most of the cases we examined we could substitute for the word meaning the words
intention and tendency. Now was it only a deceptive appearance, or a poetic glorification of the error, that led. us to believe that we
could see an intention in it?

Let us still keep to the examples of slips of the tongue and review a larger number of such manifestations. We then find whole
categories of cases in which the intention, the meaning, of the slip is quite obvious, particularly so in those instances in which the
opposite of what was intended is said. The President says in his opening speech: "I declare the session closed" That is surely not
ambiguous. The meaning and intention of this slip is that he wants to close the session. One might well say; "he said so himself"; we
only take him at his word. Please do not interrupt me with the objection that this is impossible, that we know quite well that he
wished to open the session, not to close it, and that he himself whom we have just recognized as the best judge of his intention will
affirm that he meant to open it. In doing so you forget that we agreed to consider the error by itself; its relation to the intention
which it disturbs will be discussed later. You would be guilty of an error in logic, by which you would conveniently dispose of the
problem under discussion, which in English is called begging the question.

In other cases, where the form of the slip is not exactly the opposite of what is intended, a contradictory sense may still often come
to expression. "I am not inclined (geneigt) to appreciate my predecessor's merits." Inclined is not the opposite of in a position to
(geeignet), but it is an open confession of a thought in sharpest contradiction to the speaker's duty to meet the situation gracefully.

In still other cases, the slip simply adds a second meaning to the intended. The sentence then sounds like a contraction, an
abbreviation, a condensation of several sentences into one: Thus the determined lady who said: "He may eat' and drink whatever I
choose." That is as if she had said: "He can eat and drink what he chooses, but what does it matter what he chooses? It is for me to
do the choosing!" Slips of the tongue often give this impression of abbreviation; for instance, when a professor of anatomy at the
end of his lecture on the nasal cavities asks Whether his class has thoroughly understood it and, after a general reply in the
affirmative, goes on to say: "I can hardly believe that that is so, since persons who can thoroughly understand the nasal cavities can
be counted, even in a city of millions, on one finger ... I mean, on the fingers of one hand." The abbreviated sentence has its own
meaning; it says that there is only one person who understands the subject.

In contrast to these types in which the slip plainly discloses its meaning are others in which the slip of the tongue conveys nothing
intelligible, and therefore directly controverts our expectations. The mis-pronunciation by mistake of proper names, or the
enunciation of meaningless sounds) is such a frequent occurrence that this alone would appear to dispose at once of the question
whether all errors have a meaning. Yet closer inspection of such examples discloses the fact that it is easily possible to understand
such distortions; indeed, that the difference between these unintelligible cases and the previous more comprehensible ones is not so
very great.

The owner of a horse, on being asked how it was, replied: "O, it may stad—it may take another month." Asked what he really meant
to say, he answered that he was thinking it was a sad, business, and the words sad and take together gave rise to stad. (Meringer and
Mayer.)

Another man was relating some objection able incidents and went on: "and then certain facts were refilled." He explained that he
meant to say these facts were filthy. Revealed and filthy together combine to form refilled. (Meringer and Mayer.)

You will recall the case of the young man who offered to "insort" an unknown lady. We took the-liberty of resolving this word into
insult and escort, and were quite convinced of this interpretation without requiring proof of; it. From these examples you can see
that even these more obscure cases can be explained as the concurrence, or interference, of two different intentions of speech with
one another; the differences -arise only in that in the first type of slip the one intention has entirely excluded the other, as when the
opposite is said; while in the second type the one Intention only succeeds in distorting or modifying the other, from which arise
combinations of a more or less senseless appearance.

We believe that we have now discovered the secret of a large number of slips of the tongue. If we keep this clear in mind we shall be
able to comprehend still further groups hitherto entirely mysterious. Although, for instance, in a case of distortion of a name we
cannot suppose that it is always a matter of a contest between two similar but. different names, yet the second intention is easily
perceived. Distortions of names are common enough apart from slips of the tongue; they are attempts to liken the name to
something derogatory or degrading, a common form of abuse, which educated persons soon learn to avoid but nevertheless do not
willingly give up. It may be dressed up as a joke, although one of a very low order. To quote one gross and ugly example of such a
distortion of a name, the name of the President of the French Republic, Poincari, has lately been transformed into Schweinskarre. It
is not going much further to assume that some such abusive intention may also.be behind distortions of names produced by a slip of
the tongue. In pursuing out idea, similar explanations suggest themselves for- cases of slips where the effect is comic or absurd. In
the case of the member of parliament who referred, to the "honourable member for Central Hell," the sober atmosphere of the
House is unexpectedly disturbed by the intrusion of a word that calls up a ludicrous and unflattering image; we are bound to
conclude from the analogy with certain offensive and abusive expressions that an impulse has interposed here, to this effect: "You
needn't be taken in. I don't mean a word of this. To hell with the fellow!” The same applies to slips of the tongue which transform
quite harmless words into Obscene and indecent ones.¹

We are familiar with this tendency in certain people intentionally to convert harmless words into indecent ones for the sake of the
amusement obtained; it passes for wit^ and in fact when one hears of a case one at once asks whether it was intended as a joke or
occurred unintentionally as a slip of the tongue.

Well, we seem to have solved the riddle of errors with comparatively little trouble! They are not accidents; they are serious mental
acts; they have their meaning; they arise; through the concurrence—perhaps better, the mutual interference—of two different
intentions. But now I can well understand that you want to. overwhelm, me with a flood of questions and. doubts, which must be
answered and resolved before we can enjoy this first result of our efforts. I certainly do not want to press any hasty conclusions upon
you. Let us coolly consider everything in turn.

What would you like to say? Whether I think that this explanation accounts for all cases of slips of the tongue or only for a certain
number? Whether this conception can be extended to the many other types of errors, to misreading, slips pf the pen, forgetting,
wrongly per formed actions,, mislaying things and so on?. What part the factors of fatigue, excitement,
¹Two untranslatable examples are given in tie. text, apopos fot a propos and Eischeissweibchen for Eiibeisscheibchen. (Meringer and Mayer.)—TR.

absent-mindedness and distraction of attention play in regard to the mental nature of errors? Besides this, it is clearly seen that of
the two competing meanings in the slip one is always manifest, but not always the other. How is one to arrive at the latter? And if
one believes that one has guessed it, how is one to find proof that this is not merely a probability but the only true meaning? Is there
anything else you wish to ask? If not, then I myself will continue. I will remind you that we are not really greatly concerned with
errors in themselves, but that we wished to learn from a study of them something of value from the point of view of psycho analysis.
Therefore I will put this question: "What sort of purposes or tendencies are these which thus interfere with other intentions, and
what is the relation between the interfering tendency and the other?" Thus, as soon as we have found the answer to the riddle, our
efforts begin again.

Very well then; is this the explanation of all cases of slips of the tongue? I am very much inclined to think so, and for this reason,
because whenever one examines an instance of it this type of solution may be found. Still, one cannot prove that a slip of the tongue
cannot come to pass without the agency of this mechanism. It may be so: for our purposes it is a matter of indifference, theoretically;
for the conclusions which we wish to draw by way of an introduction to psycho-analysis remain valid, even if only a small proportion
of the total incidence of slips of the tongue comes under our explanation, and this is certainly not so. The next question, whether this
explanation extends to other forms of errors, may be answered by way of anticipation In the affirmative. You can convince yourselves
of it when we turn to consider examples of slips of the pen, of wrongly performed acts, and so on. I propose, however, for technical
reasons that we should postpone doing this until we have investigated the slip of the tongue itself more thoroughly.

The question what significance those factors, which some writers have placed in the fore ground, can now have for us-—such factors
as disturbances of the circulation, fatigue, excitement, distraction, disturbances of attention—demands a more exhaustive reply if we
assume the mental mechanism of slips described above. You will notice that we do not deny these factors. Indeed^ in general it
doesn't often happen that psycho-analysis contests anything which is maintained in other quarters; as a rule, psycho-analysis only
adds something new to what has been said; and it does certainly happen on occasion that what has hitherto been over looked, and is
now supplied by psycho-analysis, is the most essential part of the matter. The influence of such physiological predispositions as arise
in slight illness, circulatory disturbances and conditions of fatigue, upon the occurrence of slips of the tongue is to be admitted
without more ado; everyday personal experirence may convince you of it. But how little is explained by this admission! Above all,
these are not necessary conditions of errors. Slips of the tongue may just as well occur in perfect health and normal conditions.
These bodily facttors, therefore, are merely contributory; they only favour and facilitate the peculiar mental mechanism which
produces slips of the tongue. I once used an illustration for this state of things which I will repeat here, as I know of no better. Just
suppose that on some dark night I am walking in a lonely neighbourhood and am assaulted by a rogue who seizes my watch and
money, whereupon since I could not see the robber's face clearly, I make my complaint at the police-station in these words:
"Loneliness and darkness have just robbed me of my valuables." The police officer might reply tb me: "You seem to carry your
support of the extreme mechanistic point of view too far for the facts. Suppose we put the case thus: Under cover of darkness and
encouraged by the loneliness of the spot, some unknown thief has made away with your valuables. It appears to me that the
essential thing to be done is to look about for the thief. Perhaps we shall then be able to take the plunder from him again."

Psycho-physiological factors such as excitement, absent-mindedness, distraction of attention, obviously provide very little in the way
of explanation. They are mere phrases; they are screens, and we should not be deterred from looking behind them. The question is
rather what has here called forth the excitement or the particular diversion of attention. The in fluence of sound-values,
resemblances between words, and common associations connecting certain words, must also be recognized as important. They
facilitate the slip by pointing but a path for it to take. But if there is ;a path before me, does it necessarily follow that I must go along
it? I also require a motive to determine my choice and, further, some force to propel me forward. These sound-values and word
associations are, therefore, just like the bodily conditions, the facilitating causes of slips of the tongue, and cannot provide the real
explanation of them. Consider for a moment the enormous majority of cases in which the words I am using in my speech are not de
ranged On account of sound-resemblance to other words, intimate associations with opposite meanings, or with expressions in
common use, It yet remains to suppose, with the philosopher Wundt, that a slip of the tongue arises when the tendency to
associations gains an ascendance over the original intention owing to bodily fatigue. This would be quite plausible if experience did
not controvert it by the fact that in a number of cases the bodily, and in another large group-the associative, predisposing causes are
absent.

Particularly interesting to me, however, is your next question, namely, by what means the two mutually disturbing tendencies may be
ascertained. You probably do not suspect how portentous this question is. You will agree that one of these tendencies, the one which
is interfered with, is always unmistakable; the person who commits the slip knows it and acknowledges it. Doubt and hesitation only
arise in regard to the other, what we have called the interfering tendency. Now we have already heard, and you will certainly not
have forgot ten, that in a certain number of cases this other tendency is equally plain. It is evident in the result of the slip if only we
have the courage to let the slip speak for itself. The President who said the opposite of what he meant—it is clear that he wishes to
open the session, but equally clear that he would also like to close it. That is so plain that it needs no interpreting. But in the other
cases, in which the interfering tendency merely distorts the original without itself coming to full expression, how can the interfering
tendency be detected in the distortion?

In one group of cases by a very safe and simple method, by the same method, that is, by which, we establish the tendency that is
interfered with. We enquire of the speaker, who tells us then and there; after making the slip he re stores the word he originally
intended. "O, it may stad—no, it may take another month." Well, the interfering tendency may be like wise supplied by him. We say,
"Now why did you first say stad?" He replies, "I meant to say it was a sad business"; and in the other case in which "refilled" was said,
the speaker informs you that he first meant to say it was a filthy business, but controlled himself and substituted another expression.
The discovery of the disturbing tendency is here as definitely established as that of the disturbed tendency. It is not without intention
that I have selected as examples cases which owe neither their origin nor their explanation to me or to any supporter of mine. Still, in
both these cases, a certain intervention was necessary in order to produce the explanation. One had to ask the speaker why he made
the slip, what explanation he could give. Without that he might have passed it by without seeking to explain it. Being asked, however,
he gave as his answer the first idea that occurred to him. And see now, this little intervention and the result of it constitute already a
psycho-analysis, a prototype of every psycho-analytic investigation that we may undertake further.

Now, should I be too suspicious if I were to surmise that, at the very moment at which psycho-analysis begins to dawn upon you, a
resistance to it instantly raises itself within your mind? Are you not eager to object that information supplied by the person enquired
of, who committed the slip, is not completely reliable evidence. He naturally wishes, you think, to meet your request to explain his
slip, and so he says the first thing that he can think of, if it will do at all. There is no proof that that is actually how the slip arose. It
may have been so, but it may just as well have been otherwise. Something else also might have occurred to him that would have met
the case as well or even better.

It is remarkable how little respect you have, in your hearts, for a mental fact! Imagine that someone had undertaken a chemical
analysis of a certain substance and had ascertained that one ingredient of it is of a certain weight, so and so many milligrams. From
this weight, thus arrived at, certain conclusions may be drawn. Do you think now it would ever occur to a chemist to discredit these
conclusions on the ground that the isolated substance might as well have had some other weight? Everyone recognizes the fact that
it actually had this weight and no other, and builds further conclusions confidently on that fact. But when it is a question of mental
fact, that it was such an idea and no other that occurred to the person when questioned, you will not accept that as valid, but say
that something else might as well have occurred to him! The truth is that you have an illusion of a psychic freedom with in you which
you do not want to give up. I regret to say that on this point I find myself in sharpest opposition to your views.

Now you will break off here only to take up your resistance at another point. You will continue: "We understand that it lies in the
peculiar technique of psycho-analysis to bring the person analysed to give the solution of its problems. Let us take another example,
that in which the after-dinner speaker calls upon the company to hiccough to the health of their guest. The interfering tendency is,
you say, in this case to ridicule; this it is which opposes the intention to do honour. But this is a mere interpretation on your part,
based on observations made independently of the slip. If in this case you were to question the perpetrator of the slip he would not
confirm your view that he intended an insult; on the contrary, he would vehemently deny it. Why do you not abandon your
undemonstrable interpretation in the face of this flat denial?"

Yes, this time you have lighted upon something formidable. I can picture to myself that unknown speaker; he is probably an assistant
of the guest of honour, perhaps already a junior lecturer himself, a young man with the brightest prospects. I will press him and ask
whether he is sure he did not perceive some feeling in himself antagonistic to the demand that he should pay honour to his chief. A
nice fuss there is! He becomes impatient and suddenly bursts out at me: "Look here, enough of this cross-examination, or I'll make
myself disagreeable! You will ruin my career with your suspicions. I simply said aufstossen instead of anstossen, because I'd already
said auf twice before it. It's the thing that Meringer calls a perseveration, and there's nothing else to be read into it. Do you
understand me? That's enough." H'm, this is a startling reaction, a truly energetic repudiation. I see that there is nothing more to be
done with the young man, but I think to myself that he betrays a strong personal interest in making out that his slip has no meaning.
You will perhaps agree too that he has no right to become so uncivil over a purely theoretical investigation, but after all, you will
think, he must know what he wanted: to say and what not.

O, so he must? That is perhaps still open to question.

Now you think you have me in a trap. "So that is your technique," I hear you say. "When the person who commits a slip gives an
explanation which fits your views then you declare him to be-the final authority on the subject. He says so himself! But if what he
says does not suit your book, then you suddenly assert that what he says does not count, one need not believe it."

Certainly that is so. But I can give you another instance of a similarly monstrous procedure. When an accused man confesses to a
deed the judge believes him, but when he denies it the judge does not believe him. Were it otherwise the law could not be
administered, and in spite of occasional miscarriages you will admit that the system, on the whole, works well.

"Well, but are you a judge, and is the person who commits a slip to be accused before you? Is a slip of the tongue a crime?"

Perhaps we need not reject even this comparison. But see now to what deep-seated differences our attempt to investigate the
apparently harmless problems of errors has brought us, differences which at this stage we do not know in the least how to reconcile.
I suggest that we should make a temporary compromise on the basis of the analogy with the judge and the prisoner. You shall grant
me that the meaning of an error admits of no doubt when the subject of the analysis acknowledges it himself. I, in turn, will admit
that a direct proof for the suspected meaning cannot be obtained if the subject refuses us the information, and, of course, this
applies also when the subject Is not present to give us the information. As also in legal proceedings, we are then thrown back upon
indications in order to form a decision, the truth of which is sometimes more and sometimes less probable. At law, for practical
reasons, guilt has to be declared also on circumstantial evidence. There is no. such necessity here; but neither are we bound to
refrain from considering such evidence. It is a mistake to, believe that a science consists in nothing but conclusively proved
propositions, and it is unjust to demand that it should. It is a demand only made by those who feel a craving for authority in some
form and a need to replace the religious catechism by something else, even if it be a scientific one. Science in its catechism has but
few apodictic precepts; it consists mainly of statements which it has developed to varying degrees of probability. The capacity to be
content with these approximations to certainty and the ability to carry on constructive work despite the lack of final confirmation are
actually a mark of the scientific habit of mind.

But where shall we find a starting-point for our interpretations, and the indications for our proof, in cases where the subject under
analysis says nothing to explain the meaning of the error? From various sources. First; by analogy with similar phenomena not
produced by error, as when we maintain that the distortion of a name by mistake has the same intention to ridicule behind it as
intentional distortion of names. And then, from the mental situation in which the error arose, from our knowledge of the character
of the person who commits it, and of the feelings active in him before the error, to which it may be a response. As a rule, what
happens is that we find the meaning of the error according to general principles; and this, to begin with, is only a conjecture, a
tentative solution, proof being discovered later by an examination of the mental situation. Sometimes it is necessary to await further
developments, which have been so to speak, foreshadowed by the error, before we can find confirmation of our conjecture.

I cannot easily give you evidence of this if I have to limit myself to the field of slips of the tongue, although even here I have a few
good examples. The young man who offered to "insort" the lady is in fact very shy; the lady whose husband may eat and drink what
she likes I know to be one of those managing women who rule the household with a rod of iron. Of take the following case: At a
general meeting of a club a young member made a violent attack in a speech, in the course of which' he spoke of the officers of the
society as "Lenders of the Committee," which appears to be a substitute for Members of the Committee.¹ We should conjecture that
against his attack some interfering tendency was active .which was itself in some way connected with the idea of lending. As a matter
of fact, an informant tells us that the speaker is in constant money difficulties and was actually attempting to raise money at the
time. So the interfering tendency^ really is to be translated into the thought: "Be more moderate in your opposition: these are the
people whom you want to lend you money."

If I diverge into the field of other kinds of errors I can give you a wide selection of examples of such circumstantial evidence.

If anyone forgets an otherwise familiar; proper name and has difficulty in retaining it in his memory—even with an effort-it is not
hard to guess that he has something against the owner of the name and does not like to think of him; consider in the light of this the
following notes on the mental situation in which an error of this kind was made.
¹Voxschussmitglieder instead of Ausschussmitglieder.

A Mr. Y fell in love with a lady, who did not return the feeling and shortly after married a Mr. X, Although Mr. Y had already known Mr.
X for some time, and even had business relations with him, he forgets his name over and over again, so that he frequently has to ask
someone the man's name when it is necessary to write to him.² Obviously. Mr. Y wants to obliterate all knowledge of his fortunate
rival. "Never thought of shall he be."

Another example: a lady inquires of a doctor about a common acquaintance, calling her by her maiden name. She has forgotten the
married name. She admits that she strongly objected to the marriage and dislikes the husband intensely.³

Later we shall have much to say in other connections in regard to the forgetting of names; at the moment we are chiefly interested in
the mental situation in which the lapse of memory occurs.

The forgetting of resolutions can in general be referred to an opposing current of feeling which is against carrying out the intention. It
is not only we psycho-analysts who hold this view, however; it is the ordinary attitude of everyone in their daily affairs, which they
only deny in theory. The protege whose patron apologizes for having forgotten his request is not pacified by such an apology. He
thinks immediately: "It's-evidently nothing to him; he promised, but he doesn't mean to do it." For getting is therefore criticized even
in life, in certain connections, and the difference between the popular and the psycho-analytic conception! of these errors seems to
be dispelled. Imagine; a hostess receiving a guest with the words: "What, is it today you were coming? I "quite forgot that I had
asked you for to-day"; or a young man confessing to his beloved that he had forgotten all about the appointment they had arranged
on the last occasion. He will never; admit it; he will rather invent on the spur of; the moment the most wildly improbable hindrances
which prevented his coming and made it impossible for him to communicate with her from that day to this. We all know that in
military service the excuse of having forgotten is worthless and saves no one from punishment; the system is recognized.as
justifiable. Here everyone is suddenly agreed that a certain mistake has a meaning and what that meaning is. Why are they not
consistent enough to extend their insight to other errors and then
²From C. G. Jung.
³From A. A. Brill.



openly acknowledge it? There is naturally also an answer to this.

If the meaning of forgetting resolutions is so little open to doubt in the minds of people in general you will be the less surprised to
find that writers employ such mistakes in a similar sense. Those of you who have seen or read Shaw's Caesar and Cleopatra will recall
that Caesar, when departing in the last scene, is pursued by the feeling that there was something else he intended to do which he
had now forgotten. At last it turns out what it is to say farewell to Cleopatra. By this small device the author attempts to ascribe to
the great Caesar a feeling of superiority which he did not possess and to which he did not at all aspire. You can learn from historical
sources that Caesar arranged for Cleopatra to follow him to Rome and that she was living there with her little Caesarion when Caesar
was murdered, whereupon she fled the city.

The cases of forgetting resolutions are as a rule so clear that they are of little use for our purpose, which is to discover in the mental
situation indications of the meaning of the error. Let us turn, therefore, to a particularly ambiguous and obscure form of terror, that
of losing and mislaying objects. It will certainly seem-incredible to you that the person himself could have any purpose in losing
things, which is often such a painful accident. But there are innumerable instances of this kind: A young man loses a pencil to which
he was much attached. A few days before he had had a letter from his brother-in-law which concluded with these-words: "I have
neither time nor inclination at present to encourage you in your frivolity and idleness."¹ Now the pencil was a present from this
brother-in-law. Had it not been for this coincidence we could not of course have maintained that the loss involved any intention to
get rid of the gift. Similar cases are very numerous. One loses objects when one has quarrelled with the giver and no longer wants to
be reminded of him, or again, when one has tired of them and wants an excuse to provide oneself with something different and
better. Dropping, breaking, and destroying things of course serve a similar purpose in regard to the object. Can it be considered
accidental when, just before his birthday, a child loses and damages his possessions, for instance, his watch and his schoolbag?

Anyone who has experienced often enough the annoyance of. not being able to find some
¹From B. Dattner.

thing which he has himself put away will certainly be unwilling to believe that he could have had any intention1 in so doing. And yet
cases are not at all rare in which the circumstances attendant on the act of mislaying point to a tendency to put the object aside
temporarily or permanently. Perhaps the best example of this kind is the following.

A young man told me this story: "A few years ago there were misunderstandings between me and my wife; I thought her too cold,
and, though I willingly acknowledged her excellent qualities, we lived together without affection. One day, on coming in from a walk,
she brought me a book which she had bought me because she thought it would interest me. I thanked her for her little attention,
promised to read the book, put it among my #dngs and never could find it again. Months passed by and occasionally I thought of this
derelict book and tried in vain to find it. About six months later my dear mother, who lived some distance away, fell ill. My wife left
our house to go and nurse her mother-in-law, who became seriously ill, giving my wife an opportunity of showing her best qualities.
One evening I came home full of enthusiasm and gratitude towards my wife. I walked up to my writing desk and opened a certain
drawer in it, without a, definite intention but with a kind of somnambulistic sureness, and there before, me lay the lost book which I
had so often looked for.”

With the disappearance of the motive the inability to find the mislaid object also came to an end.

I could multiply this collection of examples indefinitely; but I will not do so now. ln my Psycho-pathology of Everyday Life (first
published in 1901) you will find plenty of examples for the study of errors.² All these examples demonstrate the same thing over and
over again; they make it probable to your, that; mistakes have a meaning and they show you how the meaning can be guessed-or
confirmed from the attendant circumstances, I restrict myself rather to-day, because our intention here was limited to studying these
phenomena with a view to obtaining an introduction to psycho-analysis. There are only two groups of occurrences into which I must
still go, the accumulated and combined errors, and confirmation of our interpretations by subsequent events.

Accumulated and combined errors are cer
²Also in the writings of A. Maeder (French), A. A. Brill arid Ernest Jones {English), and J. Starcke (Dutch) and others.

tainly the finest flowers of the species. If we were only concerned to prove that errors had a meaning, we should have limited
ourselves to them at the outset, for the meaning in them is unmistakable, even to the dullest intelligence, and strong enough to
impress the most critical judgment. The repetition of the occurrences betrays a persistence which is hardly ever an attribute of
chance, but which fits well with the idea of design. Further, the exchanging of one kind of mistake for another shows us what is the
most important and essential element in the error; and that is, not its form, or the means of which it makes use, but the tendency
which makes use of it and can achieve its end in the most various ways. Thus I will give you a case of repeated forgetting: Ernest
Jones relates that he once allowed a letter to lie on his writing desk for several days for some unknown reason. At last he decided to
post it, but received it back from the dead-letter office, for he had forgotten to address it. After he had ad dressed it he took it to post
but this time with out a stamp. At this point he finally had to admit to himself his objection to sending the letter at all.

In another case, taking up a thing by mistake is combined with mislaying it. A lady travelled to Rome with her brother-in-law, a
famous artist. The visitor was much feted by the Germans living hi Rome and received, among other things, a present of an antique
gold medal. The lady was vexed because her brother-in-law did not appreciate the fine specimen highly enough. After her sister had
arrived she returned home and discovered, upon unpacking, that she had brought the medal with her—how, she did not know. She
wrote at once to her brother-in-law telling him that she would send the stolen property back to him the next day. But the next day
the medal was so cleverly mislaid that it could not be discovered and could not be re turned, and then it began to dawn upon the
lady what her absent-mindedness had meant, namely, that she wanted to keep the work of art for herself.¹

I have already given you an example of a combination of forgetfulness with an error, in the case in which someone forgets an
appointment, and a second time, with the firm intention bf not forgetting it again, appears at an hour which is not the appointed
one. A quite analogous case was told me from his own experience by a friend who pursues literary as well as scientific interests. He
said: "Some years
¹From R. Reitler.
ago I accepted election to the Council of a certain literary society because I hoped that the society might at some time be useful to
me in getting a play of mine produced; and, although not much interested, I attended the meetings regularly every Friday. A few
months ago I received an assurance that my play would be produced at a theatre in F and since then it has invariably happened that I
forget to attend the meetings of the society. When I read your writings on this subject, I reproached myself with my meanness in
staving away now that these people can no longer be of use to me and determined on no account to forget on the following Friday. I
kept reminding myself of my resolution until I carried it out and stood at the door of the meeting-room. To my amazement it was
closed and the meeting was already over! I had made a mistake in the day of the week and it was then Saturday!"

It would be tempting to collect more of these examples, but I will pass on and, instead, let you glance at those cases in which
interpretation has to wait for confirmation in the future.

The main condition in these cases is, as we might expect, that the mental situation at the time is unknown or cannot be ascertained.
At the moment, therefore, our interpretation is no more than a supposition to which we ourselves would not ascribe too much
weight. Later, however, something happens which shows us how well justified our previous interpretation was. I was once the guest
of a young married couple and heard the young wife laughingly describe her latest experience, how the day after the return from the
honeymoon she had called for her sister and gone shopping with her as in former times, while her husband went to his business.
Suddenly she noticed a man on the other side of the street and, nudging her sister, said, "Look, there goes Mr. K." She had forgotten
that this man had been her husband; for some weeks. A shudder went over me as I heard the story, but I dared not draw the
inference. Several years later the little incident came back to my mind after this marriage had come to a most unhappy end.

Maeder tells a story of a lady who had for gotten to try on her wedding-dress the day before the wedding, to the despair of the dress
maker, and remembered it only late in the evening. He connects it with the fact that soon after the marriage she was divorced by her
husband. I know a woman now divorced from her husband who, in managing her money-affairs, frequently signed documents with
her maiden name, many years before she really resumed it. I know of other women who lost their wedding rings on the honeymoon
and I know, too, that the course of the marriage lent meaning to this accident. And now one striking example more, with a better
ending. It is told of a famous German chemist that his marriage never took place because he forgot the hour of the ceremony and
went to the laboratory instead of to the church. He was wise enough to let the matter rest with one attempt, and died unmarried at
a ripe age.

Perhaps the idea has also come to you that in these examples mistakes seem to have re placed the omens or portents of the
ancients. And indeed, certain kinds of portents were nothing but errors, for instance, when anyone stumbled or fell down. It is true
that another group of omens bore the character of objective events rather than of subjective acts. But you would not believe how
difficult it is sometimes to decide whether a specific instance belongs to the first category or to the second. The act knows so often
how to disguise itself as a passive experience.

Every one of us who can look back over a fairly long experience of life would probably say that he might have spared himself many
disappointments and painful surprises, if he had had the courage and resolution to interpret as omens the little mistakes which he
noticed in his intercourse with others, and to regard them as signs of tendencies still in the background. For the most part one does
not dare to do this; one has an impression that one would become superstitious again by a circuitous scientific path. And then, not all
omens come true, and our theories will show you how it is that they need not all come true.

                                                          FOURTH LECTURE

                                                The Psychology of Errors (Conclusion)

That errors have a meaning we may certainly set down as established by our efforts up to this point, and may take this conclusion as
a basis for our further investigations. Let me once more emphasize the fact that we do not maintain—and for our purposes do not
need to maintain—that every single mistake which occurs has a meaning, although I think that probable. It is enough for us to prove
that such a meaning is relatively frequent in the various forms of errors. In this respect, by the way, the various forms show certain
differences. Some Cases of slips of the tongue, slips of the pen, and so on, may be the effect of a purely physiological cause, though I
cannot believe this possible of those errors which depend upon forgetfulness (forgetting of names or intentions, mislaying, and so
on); losing possessions is in all probability to be recognized as unintentional in some cases; altogether our conceptions are only to a
certain extent applicable to the mistakes which occur in daily life. These limitations should be borne in mind by you when we
proceed on the assumption that errors are mental acts arising from the mutual interference of two intentions.

This is the first result of our psycho-analysis. Hitherto psychology has known nothing of such interferences or of the possibility that
they could occasion manifestations of this kind. We have widened the domain of mental phenomena to a very considerable extent
and have won for psychology phenomena which were never before accredited to it.
Let us dwell for a moment on the proposition that errors are mental acts. Does this mean any more than our former statement, that
they have a meaning? I do not think so; on the contrary, it is a more indefinite statement and one more open to misunderstanding.
Everything that can be observed in mental life will be designated at one time or another as a mental phenomenon. It depends,
however, whether the particular mental phenomenon is directly due to bodily, organic or material agencies, in which case it does not
fail to psychology for investigation; or whether it arose directly from other mental processes, behind which at some point the
succession of organic agencies then begins. We have in mind the latter state of things when we describe a phenomenon as a mental
process, and it is therefore more expedient to put our statement in this form: The phenomenon has meaning; and by meaning we
understand significance, intention, tendency and a position in a sequence of mental concatenations.

There is another group of occurrences which is very closely related to errors but for which this name is not suitable. We call them
accidental and symptomatic acts. They also appear to be unmotivated, insignificant and unimportant but, in addition to this, they
have very clearly the feature of superfluity. They are, on the one hand, distinguishable from errors by the absence of any second
intention to which they are opposed and which they disturb; on the other hand, they merge without any definite line of demarcation
into the gestures and movements which we regard as expressions of the emotions. To this class of accidental performances -belong
all those apparently purposeless acts which we carry out, as though in play, with clothing, parts of the body, objects with in reach;
also the omission of such acts; and again the tunes which we hum to ourselves. I maintain that all such performances have meaning
and are explicable in the same way as are errors, that they are slight indications of other more important mental processes, and are
genuine mental acts. I propose, however, not to linger over this further extension of the field of mental phenomena, but to return to
the errors; for by a consideration of them problems of importance in the enquiry into psycho-analysis can be worked out much more
clearly.

Undoubtedly, the most interesting questions which we formulated while considering errors, and have not yet answered, are the
following: We said that errors result from the mutual interference of two different intentions, of which one may be called the
intention interfered with, and the other the interfering tendency. The intentions interfered with give rise to no further questions, but
concerning the others we wish to know, first, what kind of intentions these are that arise as disturbers of others, and secondly, what
are the relations between the interfering tendencies and those which suffer the interference?

Allow me to take slips of the tongue again as representative of the whole series, and to answer the second question before the first.

The interfering tendency in the slip of the tongue may be connected in meaning with the intention interfered with, in which case the
former contains a contradiction of the latter, or corrects, or supplements it. Or, in other more obscure and more Interesting cases,
the interfering tendency may have no connection whatever in meaning with the intention interfered with.

Evidence for the first of these two relationships can be found without difficulty in the examples already studied and in others similar
to them. In almost all cases of slips of the tongue where the opposite of what is meant is said the interfering tendency expresses the
opposite meaning to that of the intention interfered with, and the slip is the expression of the conflict between two incompatible
impulses. "I declare the meeting open, but would prefer to have closed it'' is the meaning of the President's slip. A political paper:
which had been accused of corruption defends itself in an article meant to culminate with the words: "Our readers will testify that
we have always laboured for the public benefit in the most disinterested manner." But the editor entrusted with the composition of
the defence wrote "in the most interested manner." That is to say, he thinks, "I have to write this stuff, but I know better." A
representative of the people, urging that the Kaiser should be told the truth ruckhaltslos (unreservedly) hears an inner voice terrified
at his boldness, and by a slip of the tongue transforms ruckhaltslos into ruckgratslos (with out backbone, ineffectually).

In the examples already given, which produce an impression of contraction and abbreviation, the process represents a correction,
addition, or continuation, in which a second tendency manifests itself alongside the first. "Things were then revealed, but better say
it straight out, they were filthy, therefore—things were then refilled." "The people who understand this subject may be counted on
the fingers of one hand, but no, there is really only one person who understands it, very well then—can be counted on one finger."
Or, "my husband can eat and drink what he likes, but you know,' I don't permit him to like this and that; so then-—he may eat and
drink what I like." In all these' cases the slip arises from the content of the intention interfered with, or is directly connected with it.

The other kind of relationship between the two interfering tendencies seems strange. If the interfering tendency has nothing to do
with the content of the one interfered with, whence comes it then, and how does it happen to make itself manifest just at that
point? Observation, which alone can supply the answer to this, shows that the interfering tendency, proceeds from a train of thought
which has occupied the person shortly before and then reveals itself in this way as an after-effect, irrespective! Of whether or not it
has already been expressed in speech. It is really therefore to be described as a perseveration, though not necessarily a
perseveration of spoken words. An associative connection between the interfering tendency and that interfered with is hot lacking
here either, though it is not found in the content but is artificially established, sometimes with considerable forcing of the
connections.

Here is a simple example of this which I observed myself. Once in the beautiful Dolomites I met two Viennese ladies who were
starting for a walking-tour. T accompanied them part of the way and we discussed the pleasures, but also the trials, of this way of life.
One of the ladies admitted that spending the day like this entailed much discomfort. "It certainly is very unpleasant to tramp all day
in the sun till one's blouse ... and things are soaked through." In this sentence she had to overcome a slight hesitation at one point.
Then she continued: "But then, when one gets nach Hose and can change . . ." (Hose means drawers: the lady meant to say nach
House which means home). We did not analyse this slip, but I am sure you will easily understand it The lady's intention had been to
enumerate a more complete list of her clothes, "blouse,' chemise and drawers." From motives of propriety, mention of the drawers
(Hose) was omitted; but in the next sentence, the content of which is quite in dependent, the unuttered word came to light as a
distortion of the word it resembled in sound, home (Hause).

Now we can turn at last to the main question which has been so long postponed, namely, what kind of tendencies these are which
bring themselves to expression in this unusual way by interfering with other intentions. They are evidently very various, yet our aim
is to find some element common to them all. If we examine a series of examples for this purpose we shall soon find that they fall into
three groups. To the first group belong the cases in which the interfering tendency is known to the speaker and, moreover, was felt
by him before the slip. Thus, in the case of the slip "refilled," the speaker not only admitted that he had criticized the events in
question as "filthy," but further, that he had had the intention, which he subsequently reversed, of expressing this opinion in words.
A second group is formed by other cases in which the interfering tendency is likewise recognized by the speaker as his own, but he is
not aware that it was active in him before the slip. He therefore accepts our interpretation, but remains to some extent surprised by
it. Examples of this attitude are prob ably more easily found in other errors than in slips of the tongue. In the third group the
interpretation of the interfering tendency is energetically repudiated by the speaker; not only does he dispute that it was active in
him before the slip, but he will maintain that it is altogether entirely alien to him. Recall the case about hiccoughing and the
positively discourteous rebuff which I brought upon myself by detecting the interfering tendency. You know that in our attitude
towards these cases you and I are still far from an agreement. I should make nothing of the after-dinner speaker's denial and hold
fast to my interpretation unwaveringly, while you, I imagine, are still impressed by his vehemence and are wondering whether one
should not forego the interpretation of such errors and let them pass for purely physiological acts, as in the days before analysis. I can
imagine what it is that alarms you. My interpretation includes the assumption that tendencies of which a speaker knows nothing can
express themselves through him and that I can deduce them from various indications. You hesitate before a conclusion so novel and
so pregnant with consequences. I understand that, and admit that up to a point you are justified. But let one thing be clear: if you in
tend to carry to its logical conclusion the conception of errors which has been confirmed by so many examples, you must decide to
make this startling assumption. If you cannot do this, you will have to abandon again the understanding of errors which you had only
just begun to obtain.

Let us pause a moment on that which unites the three groups and is common to the three mechanisms of a slip of the tongue.
Fortunately this common element is unmistakable. In the first two groups the interfering tendency is admitted by the speaker; in the
first, there is the additional fact that it showed itself immediately before the slip. But in both cases it has been forced back. The
speaker had determined not to convert the idea into speech and then it happens that he makes a slip of the tongue; that is to say,
the tendency which is debarred from expression asserts itself against his will and gains utterance, either by altering the expression of
the intention permitted by him, or by mingling with it, or actually by setting itself in place of it. This then is the mechanism of a slip of
the tongue.

For my own part I can bring the process in the third group also into perfect harmony with the mechanism here described. I need only
assume that these three groups, are differentiated by the varying degrees to which the forcing back of an intention is effective. In the
first group, the intention is present and makes itself perceptible before the words are spoken; not until then does it suffer the
rejection for which it indemnifies itself in the slip. In the second group the rejection reaches further back; the intention is no longer
perceptible even before the speech. It is remarkable that this does not hinder it in the least from being the active cause of the slip.
But this state of things simplifies the explanation of the process in the third group. I shall be bold enough to assume that a tendency
can still express itself by an error though it has been debarred from expression for a long time, perhaps for a very long time, has not
made itself, perceptible at all, and can therefore be directly repudiated by the speaker. But leaving aside the problem of the third
group, you must conclude from the other cases that a suppression (Unterdruckung) of a previous intention to say something is the
indispensable condition for the occurrence of a slip of the tongue.

We may now claim to have made further progress in the understanding of errors. We not only know them to be mental phenomena
in which meaning and purpose are recognizable, not only know that they arise from the mutual interference of two different
intentions, but in addition we know that, for one of these intentions to be able to express itself by interfering with another, it must
itself have been subject to some hindrance against its operation. It must first be itself interfered with, before it can interfere with
others. Naturally this does not give us a complete explanation of the phenomena which we call errors. We see at once further
questions arising, and in general we suspect that as we progress towards comprehension the more numerous will be the occasions
for new questions. We might ask, for instance, why the matter does not proceed much more simply. If the intention to restrain a
certain tendency instead of carrying it into effect is present in the mind, then this restraint ought to succeed, so that nothing
whatever of the tendency gains expression, or else it might fail so that the restrained tendency achieves full expression. But errors
are compromise-formations; they express part-success and part-failure for each of the two intentions; the threatened intention is
neither entirely suppressed nor, apart from some instances, does it force itself through intact. We can imagine that special conditions
must be present for the occurrence of such interference (or compromise)-formations, but we cannot even conjecture of what kind
they may be. Nor do I think that we could discover these unknown circumstances by penetrating further into the study of errors. It
will be necessary first to examine thoroughly yet other obscure fields of mental life: only the analogies to be met with there can give
us courage to form those assumptions which are requisite for a more searching elucidation of errors. And one other point! To work
from slight indications, as we constantly do in this field, is not without its dangers. There is a mental disorder called combinatory
paranoia in which the practice of utilizing such small indications is carried beyond all limits, and I naturally do not contend that the
conclusions which are built up on such a basis are throughout correct. Only by the breadth of our observations, by the accumulation
of similar impressions from the most varied forms of mental life, can we guard against this danger.

So now we will leave the analysis of errors. But there is one thing more which I might impress upon you: to keep in mind, as a model,
the method by which we have studied these phenomena. You can perceive from these examples what the aim of our psychology is.
Our purpose is not merely to describe and classify the phenomena, but to conceive them as brought about by the play of forces iii
the mind, as expressions of tendencies striving towards a goal, which work together or against one another. Weare endeavouring to
attain a dynamic conception of mental phenomena. In this conception, the trends we merely infer are more prominent than the
phenomena we perceive.

So we will probe no further into errors; but we may still take a fleeting glimpse over the breadth of this whole field, in the course of
which we shall both meet with things already known and come upon the tracks of others that are new. In so doing, we will keep to
the division into three groups made at the beginning of our study: slips of the tongue, with the coordinate forms of slips of the pen,
misreading, mis-hearing; of forgetting with its subdivisions according to the object forgotten (proper names, foreign words,
resolutions, impressions); and of mislaying, mistaking, and losing objects. Mistakes, in so far as they concern us, are to be grouped
partly under the head of forgetting, partly under acts erroneously performed (picking up the wrong objects, etc.).

We have already treated slips of the tongue in great detail yet there is still something to add. There are certain small affective
manifestations related to slips of the tongue which are not entirely without interest. No one likes to think he has made a slip of the
tongue; one often fails to hear it when made by oneself, but never when made by someone else. Slips of the tongue are in a certain
sense infectious; it is not at all easy to speak of them without making them oneself. It is not hard to detect the motivation of even the
most trifling forms of them, although these do not throw any particular light on hidden mental processes. If, for instance, anyone
pronounces a long vowel as a short one, in consequence of a disturbance over the word, no matter how motivated, he will as a result
soon after lengthen a short vowel and commit a new slip in compensation for the first. The same thing occurs if anyone pronounces a
diphthong indistinctly and carelessly, for in stance, "ew" or "oy" as "i"; he tries to correct it by changing a subsequent "i" into "ew" or
"oy." Some consideration relating to the hearer seems to be behind this behaviour, as though he were not to be allowed to think that
the speaker is indifferent how he treats his mother tongue. The second, compensating distortion actually has the purpose of drawing
the hearer's attention to the first and assuring him that it has not escaped the speaker either. The most frequent, insignificant, and
simple forms of slips consist in contractions and anticipations in inconspicuous parts of the speech. In a long sentence, for instance,
slips of the tongue would be of the kind in which the last word intended influences the sound of an earlier word. This gives an
impression of a certain impatience to be done with the sentence, and in general it points to a certain resistance against the
communication of this sentence, or the speech altogether. From this we come to border-line cases, in which the differences between
the psycho analytical and the ordinary physiological conception of slips of the tongue become merged. We assume that in these
cases a disturbing tendency is opposing the intended speech; but it can only betray its presence and not what its own purpose is. The
interference which it causes follows some sound-influence or associative connection and may be regarded as a distraction of
attention away from the intended speech. But neither in this distraction of attention, nor in the associative tendency which has been
activated, lies the essence of the occurrence; the essence lies rather in the hint the occurrence gives of the presence of some other
intention interfering with the intended speech, the nature of which cannot in this case be discovered from its effects, as is possible in
all the more pronounced cases of slips of the tongue.
Slips of the pen, to which I now turn, are so likes lips of the tongue in their mechanism that no new points of view are to be expected
from them. Perhaps a small addition to our knowledge from this group will content us. Those very common little slips of the pen,
contractions, anticipations of later words, particularly of the last words, point to a general distaste for writing and to an impatience to
be done; more pronounced effects in slips of the pen allow the nature and intention of the interference to be recognized. In general,
if one finds a slip of the pen in a letter one knows that the writer's mind was not working smoothly at the moment; what was the
matter one cannot always establish. Slips of the pen are frequently as little noticed by those who make them as slips of the tongue.
The following, observation is striking in this connection. There are, of course, some persons who have the habit of always re-reading
every letter they write before sending it. Others do hot do this; but, if the latter make an exception and re-read a letter, they then
always, have an opportunity of finding and correcting a striking slip of the pen. Howls this to be explained? It almost looks as if such
people knew that they had made a slip in writing the letter. Are we really to believe that this is so?

There is an interesting problem connected with the practical significance of slips of the pen. You may recall the case of the murderer
H who managed, by asserting himself to be a bacteriologist, to obtain cultures of highly dangerous disease-germs from scientific
institutions, but used them for the purpose of doing away in this most modern fashion with people connected with him. This man
once complained to the authorities of one of these institutions about the ineffectiveness of the cultures sent him, but committed a
slip of the pen and, instead of the words "in my experiments on mice and guinea-pigs (M'dusen und Meerschweinchen)" the words
"in my experiments on people (Menschen)" were plainly legible. This slip even attracted the attention of the doctors at the institute
but, so far as I know, they drew no conclusion from it. Now, what do you think? Would it not have been better if the doctors had
taken the slip of the pen as a confession and started an investigation so that the murderer's proceedings might have been arrested in
time? In this case, does not ignorance of our conception of errors result in neglect which, in actuality, may be very important? Well, I
know that such a slip of the pen would certainly rouse great suspicion in me; but there is an important objection against regarding it
as a confession. The matter is not so simple. The slip of the pen is certainly an indication but, alone, it would not have justified an
enquiry. It does indeed betray that the man is occupied with the thought of infecting human beings; but it does not show with
certainty whether this thought is a definite plan to do harm or a mere phantasy of no practical importance. It is even possible that a
person making such a slip will deny, with the soundest subjective justification, the existence of such a phantasy in himself,; and will
reject the idea as a thing utterly alien to him. Later, when we come to consider the difference between psychical reality and material
reality you will be better able to appreciate these possibilities. But this again is a case in which an error was found subsequently to
have unsuspected significance.

Misreading brings us to a mental situation which is clearly different from that of slips of the tongue or the pen. One of the two
conflicting tendencies is here replaced by a sensory excitation and is perhaps therefore less tenacious. What one is reading is not a
product of one's own mind, as is that which one is going to write. In the large majority of cases, therefore, misreading consists in
complete substitution. A different word is substituted for the word to be read, without there necessarily being any connection in the
content between the text and the effect of the mistake, and usually by means of a resemblance between the words. Lichtenberg's
example of this, Agamemnon instead of angenommen, is the best of this group. To dis cover the interfering tendency which causes
the mistake one may put aside the original text altogether; the analytic investigation may begin with two questions: What is the first
idea occurring in free association to the effect of the misreading (the substitute), and in what circumstances did the misreading
occur? Occasionally a knowledge of the latter is sufficient in itself to explain the misreading, as, for instance, when someone
wandering about a strange town, driven by urgent needs, reads the word Closethaus on a large sign on the first storey. He has just
time to wonder that the board has been fixed at that height when he discovers that the word on it is actually Corsethaus. In other
cases where there is a lack of connection in content between the text and the slip' a thorough analysis: is necessary, which cannot be
accomplished without practice in psycho-analytic technique and confidence in it. But it is not usually so difficult to come by the
explanation of a case of misreading. In the example Agamemnon, the substituted word betrays without further difficulty the line of
thought from which the disturbance arose. In this time of war, for instance, it is very common for one to read everywhere names of
towns, generals, and military expressions, which are continually in one's ears, wherever one sees a word at all resembling them.
What ever interests and occupies the mind takes tie place of what is alien and as yet uninteresting. The shadows of thoughts in the
mind dim the new perceptions.

Another kind of misreading is possible, in which the text itself arouses the disturbing tendency, whereupon it is usually changed into
its opposite. Someone is required to read something which he dislikes, and analysis convinces him that a strong wish to reject what is
read is responsible for the alteration.

In the first-mentioned, more frequent cases of misreading two factors to which we ascribed great importance in the mechanism of
errors are inconspicuous; these are the conflict between two tendencies and the forcing back of one of them which compensates
itself by producing the error. Not that anything contradictory of this occurs in misreading, but nevertheless the importunity of the
train of thought tending tb the mistake is far more conspicuous than the restraint which it may have previously undergone. Just these
two factors are most clearly observable in the different situations in which errors occur through forgetfulness.

The forgetting of resolutions has positively but one meaning; the interpretation of it, as we have heard, is not denied even by the lay
man. The tendency interfering with the resolution is always an opposing one, an unwilling ness, concerning which it only remains to
enquire why it does not come to expression in a different and less disguised form; for the existence of this opposing tendency is
beyond doubt. Sometimes it is possible, too, to infer something of the motives which necessitate the concealment of this antipathy;
one sees that.it would certainly have been condemned if it declared its opposition openly, whereas by craft, in the error, it always
achieves its end. When an important change in the mental situation occurs between the formation of the resolution and its
execution, in consequence of which the execution would no longer be required, then if it were forgotten the occurrence could no
longer come within the category of errors. There would be nothing to wonder at in the error, for one recognizes that it would have
been superfluous to remember the resolution; it had been either permanently or temporarily cancelled. Forgetting to carry out a
resolution can only be called an error when there is no reason to believe that any such cancellation has occurred. Cases of forgetting
to carry out resolutions are usually so uniform and transparent, that they are of no interest for our researches. There are two points,
nevertheless, at which something new can be learnt by studying this type of error. We have said that forgetting and not executing a
resolution indicate an antagonistic tendency in opposition to it. This is certainly true, but our own investigations show that this
counter-will may be of two kinds, either immediate or mediate. What is meant by the latter is best explained by one or two
examples. When the patron forgets to say a good word for his protege to some third person, it may happen because he is actually
not much interested in the protege and therefore has no great inclination to do it. This, in any case, will be the protege's view of the
patron's omission. But the matter may be more complicated. The antipathy against executing the resolution may come from some
other source in the patron and be directed to some other point. It need have nothing at all to do with the protege, but is perhaps
directed against the third person to whom the recommendation was to be made. Here again, you see, what objections there are
against applying our interpretations practically. In spite of having correctly interpreted the error, the protege is in danger of becoming
too suspicious and of doing his patron a grave in justice. Again, if someone forgets an appointment which he had promised and was
resolved to attend, the commonest cause is certainly a direct disinclination to meet the other person. But analysis might produce
evidence that the interfering tendency was concerned, not with the person, but with the place of meeting, which was avoided on
account of some painful memory associated with it. Or if one forgets to post a letter the opposing tendency may be concerned with
the contents of the letter; but this does not exclude the; possibility that the letter in itself is harmless and becomes the subject of a
counter-tendency only because something in it reminds the writer of another letter, written previously, which did in fact afford a
direct basis for antipathy. It may then be said that the antipathy has been transferred from the earlier letter, where it was justified, to
the present one where it actually has no object. So you see that restraint and caution must be exercised in applying our quite well-
founded interpretations; that which is psychologically equivalent may in actuality have many meanings.

That such things should be must seem very strange to you. Perhaps you will be inclined to assume; that the indirect counter will is
enough to characterize the incident as pathological. But I can assure you that it is also found within the boundaries of health and
normality. And further, do not misunderstand me; this is in no sense a confession on my part that our analytic interpretations are not
to be relied on. I have said that forgetting to execute a plan may bear many meanings, but this is. so only in those cases where no
analysis is undertaken and which we have to interpret according to our general principles. If an analysis of the person in the case is
carried out it can always be established with sufficient certainty whether the antipathy is a direct one, or what its source is
otherwise.

The following is a second point: when we find proof in a large majority of cases that the forgetting of an intention proceeds from a
counter-will, we gain courage to extend this solution to another group of cases in which the person analysed does not confirm, but
denies, the presence of the counter-will inferred by us: Take as an example of this such exceedingly frequent occurrences as
forgetting to return borrowed books or to pay bills or debts. We will be so bold as to suggest, to the person in question, that there is
an intention in his mind of keeping the books and not paying the debts, whereupon he will deny this intention but will not be able to
give us any other explanation of his conduct. We then insist that he has this intention but is not aware of it; it is enough for us,
though, that it betrays itself by the effect of the forgetting. He may then repeat that he had merely forgotten about it. You will
recognize the situation as one in which we have already been placed once before. If we intend to carry through, to their logical
conclusions, the interpretations of errors which have been proved justified in so many cases, we shall be unavoidably impelled to the
assumption that tendencies exist in human beings which can effect results without their knowing of them; With this; however, we
place Ourselves in opposition to all views prevailing in life and in psychology.

Forgetting proper names, and foreign names and words, can be traced in the same way to a counter-tendency aiming either directly
or in directly against the name in question. I have already given you several examples of such direct antipathy. Indirect causation is
particularly frequent here and careful analysis is generally required to elucidate it. Thus, for instance, in the present time of war
which forces us to forego so many of our former pleasures, our ability to recall proper names suffers severely by connections of the
most far-fetched kind. It happened to me lately to be unable to remember the name of the harmless Moravian town of Bisenz; and
analysis showed that I was guilty of no direct antagonism in the matter, but that the resemblance to the name of the Palazzo Bisenzi
in Orvieto, where I had spent many happy times in the past, was responsible. As a motive of the tendency opposing the recollection
of this name, we here for the first time encounter a principle which will later on reveal itself to be of quite prodigious importance in
the causation of neurotic symptoms: namely, the aversion on the part of memory against recalling anything connected with painful
feelings that would revive the pain if it were recalled. In this tendency towards avoidance of pain from recollection or other mental
processes, this flight of the mind from that which is unpleasant, we may perceive the ultimate purpose at work behind not merely
the forgetting of names, but also many other errors, omissions, and mistakes.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 467d-468a

The forgetting of resolutions can in general be referred to an opposing current of feeling which is against carrying out the intention. It
is not only we psycho-analysts who hold this view, however; it is the ordinary attitude of everyone in their daily affairs, which they
only deny in theory. The protege whose patron apologizes for having forgotten his request is not pacified by such an apology. He
thinks immediately: "It's-evidently nothing to him; he promised, but he doesn't mean to do it." For getting is therefore criticized even
in life, in certain connections, and the difference between the popular and the psycho-analytic conception! of these errors seems to
be dispelled. Imagine; a hostess receiving a guest with the words: "What, is it today you were coming? I "quite forgot that I had
asked you for to-day"; or a young man confessing to his beloved that he had forgotten all about the appointment they had arranged
on the last occasion. He will never; admit it; he will rather invent on the spur of; the moment the most wildly improbable hindrances
which prevented his coming and made it impossible for him to communicate with her from that day to this. We all know that in
military service the excuse of having forgotten is worthless and saves no one from punishment; the system is recognized.as
justifiable. Here everyone is suddenly agreed that a certain mistake has a meaning and what that meaning is. Why are they not
consistent enough to extend their insight to other errors and then
²From C. G. Jung.
³From A. A. Brill.



openly acknowledge it? There is naturally also an answer to this.

If the meaning of forgetting resolutions is so little open to doubt in the minds of people in general you will be the less surprised to
find that writers employ such mistakes in a similar sense. Those of you who have seen or read Shaw's Caesar and Cleopatra will recall
that Caesar, when departing in the last scene, is pursued by the feeling that there was something else he intended to do which he
had now forgotten. At last it turns out what it is to say farewell to Cleopatra. By this small device the author attempts to ascribe to
the great Caesar a feeling of superiority which he did not possess and to which he did not at all aspire. You can learn from historical
sources that Caesar arranged for Cleopatra to follow him to Rome and that she was living there with her little Caesarion when Caesar
was murdered, whereupon she fled the city.

The cases of forgetting resolutions are as a rule so clear that they are of little use for our purpose, which is to discover in the mental
situation indications of the meaning of the error. Let us turn, therefore, to a particularly ambiguous and obscure form of terror, that
of losing and mislaying objects. It will certainly seem-incredible to you that the person himself could have any purpose in losing
things, which is often such a painful accident. But there are innumerable instances of this kind: A young man loses a pencil to which
he was much attached. A few days before he had had a letter from his brother-in-law which concluded with these-words: "I have
neither time nor inclination at present to encourage you in your frivolity and idleness."¹ Now the pencil was a present from this
brother-in-law. Had it not been for this coincidence we could not of course have maintained that the loss involved any intention to
get rid of the gift. Similar cases are very numerous. One loses objects when one has quarrelled with the giver and no longer wants to
be reminded of him, or again, when one has tired of them and wants an excuse to provide oneself with something different and
better. Dropping, breaking, and destroying things of course serve a similar purpose in regard to the object. Can it be considered
accidental when, just before his birthday, a child loses and damages his possessions, for instance, his watch and his schoolbag?
¹From B. Dattner.
54 FREUD: General Introduction, 546b-547a

3. I can well imagine that you will be especially impressed on being told that even people who have long studied the interpretation of
dreams in the course of their work as psycho-analysts have raised objections to our conception of dreams. It would indeed have been
exceptional if so excellent an opportunity for new mistakes had been let slip; and so assertions have been made, due to confusion of
ideas and based on unjustifiable generalizations, which are hardly less incorrect than the medical conception of dreams. One of these
statements you know already: that dreams deal with attempts at adaptation to the situation at the moment and with the solution of
future problems; in other words, that they pursue a "prospective tendency" or aim (A. Maeder). We have already demonstrated that
this statement rests upon a confusion between dreams and the latent dream thoughts and ignores the process of dream-work. If
those who speak of this "prospective tendency" mean thereby to characterize the unconscious mental activity to which the latent
thoughts belong, then, on the one hand, they tell us nothing new and, on the other hand, the description is not exhaustive; for the
unconscious mental activity occupies itself with many other things besides preparation for the future. There seems to be a much
worse confusion behind the assurance that the death clause may be found underlying every dream; I am not quite clear what this
formula is intended to mean, but I suspect that behind it the dream is confounded with the whole personality of the dreamer.

An unjustifiable generalization, based on a few striking examples, is contained in the statement that every dream admits of two kinds
of interpretation: one of the kind we have described, the so-called psycho-analytic interpretation, and the other the so-called
anagogic, which disregards the instinctual tendencies and aims at a representation of the higher mental functions (H. Silberer); there
are dreams of this kind, but you will seek in vain to extend this conception to include even a majority of dreams. After all you have
heard, the statement that all dreams are to be interpreted bisexually, as a combination of two tendencies which may be called male
and female (A. Adler), will seem to you quite incomprehensible. Here again, single dreams of this sort do of course occur and later on
you may learn that their structure is similar to that of certain hysterical symptoms. I mention all these discoveries of new general
characteristics of dreams in order to warn you against them, or at least to leave you in no doubt about my own opinion of them.

4. At one time the objective value of research into dreams seemed to be discredited by the fact that patients treated analytically
appeared to suit the content of their dreams to the favourite theories of their doctors, one class dreaming mainly of sexual impulses,
and another of impulses for mastery, others again even of rebirth (W. Stekel). The force of this observation is weakened by the
reflection that people dreamed dreams before there was any such thing as psycho-analytic treatment to influence their dreams and
that the patients undergoing treatment nowadays also used to dream before they began it. The actual fact in this supposedly new
observation is soon shown to be self-evident and of no consequence for the theory of dreams. The residue from the previous day
which gives rise to dreams is a residue from the great interests of waking life. If the physician's words and the stimuli which he gives
have become of importance to the patient they then enter into whatever constitutes the residue and can act as mental stimuli for
dream-formation, just like other interests of affective value roused on the preceding day which have not subsided; they operate in
the same way as bodily stimuli which affect the sleeper during sleep. Like these other factors inciting dreams, the trains of thought
roused by the physician can appear in the manifest dream-content or be revealed in the latent thoughts. We know indeed that
dreams can be experimentally produced, or, to speak more accurately, a part of the dream-material can be thus introduced into the
dream. In influencing his patients thus the analyst plays a part no different from that of an experimenter, like Mourly Void, who
placed in certain positions the limbs of the person upon whom he experimented.

We can often influence what a man shall dream about, but never what he will dream; for the mechanism of the dream-work and the
unconscious dream-wish are inaccessible to external influence of any sort. We realized, when we were considering dreams arising
out of bodily stimuli, that in the reaction to the bodily or mental stimuli brought to bear upon the dreamer the peculiarity and
independence of dream-life is clearly seen. The criticism I have just discussed which tends to cast a doubt upon the objectivity of
dream investigation is again an assertion based upon confounding, this time confounding dreams with—their material.



54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 852a-b

But how can this conservative quality of instincts help us to understand the self-destructive tendency? What is the earlier state of
things that such an instinct is trying to rein state? Now the answer to this question lies near at hand, and opens up a wide vista of
possibilities. If it is true that once in an inconceivably remote past, and in an unimaginable way, life arose out of inanimate matter,
then, in accordance with our hypothesis, an instinct must at that time have come into being, whose aim it was to abolish life once
more and to reestablish the inorganic state of things. If in this instinct we recognize the impulse to self destruction of our hypothesis,
then we can regard that impulse as the manifestation of a death instinct, which can never be absent in any vital process. And now
the instincts in which we believe separate themselves into two groups; the erotic instincts, which are always trying to collect living
substance together into ever larger unities, and the death instincts which act against that tendency, and try to bring living matter
back into an inorganic condition. The co-operation and opposition of these two forces produce the phenomena of life to which death
puts an end.

You will perhaps shrug your shoulders and say: That is not natural science, that is the philosophy of Schopenhauer. But, Ladies and
Gentlemen, why should not a bold thinker have divined something that a sober and painstaking investigation of details subsequently
confirms? And after all, everything has been said already, and many people said the same thing before Schopenhauer. And besides,
what we have said is not even true Schopenhauer. We do not assert that death is the only aim of life; we do not overlook the
presence of life by the side of death. We recognize two fundamental instincts, and ascribe to each of them its own aim. How the two
mingle in the vital process, how the death instinct is pressed into the service of Eros, especially when it is turned outwards in the
form of aggressiveness—these are problems which remain for future investigation. We can go no further than the point at which this
prospect opens up before us. The question whether all instincts without exception do not possess a conservative character, whether
the erotic instincts also do not seek the rein statement of an earlier state of things, when they strive towards the synthesis of living
substance into larger wholes—this question, too, must be left unanswered.
