6c. The symbolism of anxieties, obsessions, and other neurotic manifestations
5 EURIPIDES: Orestes [1-423] 394a-398b esp [255-259] 396c, [385-400] 397c-398a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK III [978- 1023] 42d-43b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Macbeth, ACT V, SC I 306b-307a
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 1b-5a esp 3a, 4a; 3b-9a / Hysteria, 25a-26a; 31b-38d; 43b-49b esp 46c-d;
54b-59d esp 58b-c; 83a; 83d-85d esp 84b; 116b-118a,c / Interpretation of Dreams, 200a-d; 370b-c / Repression, 425c-427a,c/
Unconscious, 440b-442b / General Introduction, 550d-557a; 558d-562c esp 559d-560a, 562b-c; 568a-569c; 571d-572c; 593b-594c;
596d-597b; 609c-615b esp 612c-d, 615a-b / Inhibitions, Symptoms. and Anxiety, 718a-747b esp 719b-c, 720a, 721a, 721c, 723c,
724a-727c, 729a-b, 731d-732d, 742a-c / New Introductory Lectures, 841a-843c esp 841b-d; 848b-849b; 852a-b
6c. The symbolism of anxieties, obsessions, and other neurotic manifestations
5 EURIPIDES: Orestes [1-423] 394a-398b esp [255-259] 396c, [385-400] 397c-398a
5 EURIPIDES: Orestes [1-423] 394a-398b

Electra. There is naught so terrible to describe, be it physical pain or heaven-sent affliction, that man's nature may not have to bear
the burden of it. Tantalus, for instance, once so prosperous—and I am not now taunting him with his misfortunes—that Tantalus, the
reputed son of Zeus, hangs suspended in mid air, quailing at the crag which looms above his head; paying this penalty, they say, for
the shameful weakness he displayed in failing to keep a bridle on his lips, when admitted by gods, though he was but a mortal, to
share the honours of their feasts like one of them.

He it was that begat Pelops, the father of Atreus, for whom the goddess, when she had carded her wool, spun a web of strife, even to
the making of war with his own brother Thyestes. But why need I repeat that hideous tale?

Well, Atreus slew Thyestes' children and feasted him on them; but—passing over intermediate events —from Atreus and ^Erope of
Crete sprang Agamemnon, that famous chief—if his was really fame—and Menelaus. Now it was this Menelaus who married Helen,
Heaven's abhorrence; while his brother, King Agamemnon, took Clytaemnestra to wife, name of note in Hellas, and we three
daughters were his issue, Chrysothemis, Iphigenia, and myself Electra; also a son Orestes; all of that one accursed mother, who slew
her lord, after snaring him in a robe that had no outlet. Her reason a maiden's lips may not declare, and so I leave that unexplained
for the world to guess at. What need for me to charge Phoebus with wrong-doing, though he instigated Orestes to slay his own
mother, a deed that few approved; still it was his obedience to the god that made him slay her; I, too, feebly as a woman would,
shared in the deed of blood, as did Pylades who helped us to bring it about.

After this my poor Orestes fell sick of a cruel wasting disease; upon his couch he lies prostrated, and it is his mother's blood that
goads him into frenzied fits; this I say, from dread of naming those goddesses, whose terrors are chasing him before them —even the
Eumenides. 'Tis now the sixth day since the body of his murdered mother was committed to the cleansing fire; since then no food
has passed his lips, nor hath he washed his skin; but wrapped in his cloak he weeps in his lucid moments, whenever the fever leaves
him; otherwhiles he bounds headlong from his couch, as a colt when it is loosed from the yoke. Moreover this city of Argos has
decreed, that no man give us shelter at his fireside or speak to matricides like us; yea, and this is the fateful day, on which Argos will
decide our sentence, whether we are both to die by stoning, or to whet the steel and plunge it in our necks. There is, 'tis true, one
hope of escape still left us; Menelaus has landed from Troy; his fleet now crowds the haven of Nauplia where he is come to anchor,
returned at last from Troy after ceaseless wanderings; but Helen, that "lady of sorrows," as she styles herself, hath he sent on to our
palace, carefully waiting for the night, lest any of those parents whose sons were slain beneath the walls of Troy, might see her if she
went by day, and set to stoning her. Within she sits, weeping for her sister and the calamities of her family, and yet she hath still
some solace in her woe; for Hermione, the child she left at home in the hour she sailed for Troy—the maid whom Menelaus brought
from Sparta and entrusted to my mother's keeping —is still a cause of joy to her and a reason to forget her sorrows.

I, meantime, am watching each approach, against the moment I see Menelaus arriving; for unless we find some safety there, we have
but a feeble anchor to ride on otherwise.

A helpless thing, an unlucky house!

                                                                                                                              Enter helen.

Helen. Daughter of Clytaemnestra and Agamemnon, hapless Electra, too long now left a maid unwed! how is it with thee and thy
brother, this illstarred Orestes who slew his mother! Speak; for referring the sin as I do to Phoebus, I incur no pollution by letting thee
accost me; and yet I am truly sorry for the fate of my sister Clytaemnestra, on whom I ne'er set eyes after I was driven by heaven sent
frenzy to sail on my disastrous voyage to Ilium;

but now that I am parted from her I bewail our misfortunes.

El. Prithee, Helen, why should I speak of that which thine own eyes can see the son of Agamemnon in his misery?

Beside his wretched corpse I sit, a sleepless sentinel; for corpse he is, so faint his breath; not that I reproach him with his sufferings;
but thou art highly blest and thy husband too, and ye are come upon us in the hour of adversity.

Hel. How long hath he been laid thus upon his couch ?
El. Ever since he spilt his mother's blood.

Hel. Unhappy wretch! unhappy mother! what a death she died!

El, Unhappy enough to succumb to his misery.

Hel. Prithee, maiden, wilt hear me a moment?

El. Aye, with such small leisure as this watching o'er a brother leaves.

Hel. Wilt go for me to my sister's tomb?

El. Wouldst have me seek my mother's tomb? And why?

Hel. To carry an offering of hair and a libation from me.

El. Art forbidden then to go to the tombs of those thou lovest ?

Hel. Nay, but I am ashamed to show myself in Argos.

El. A late repentance surely for one who left her home so shamefully then.

Hel. Thou hast told the truth, but thy telling is not kind to me.

El. What is this supposed modesty before the eyes of Mycenae that possesses thee?

Hel. I am afraid of the fathers of those who lie dead beneath the walls of Ilium.

El. Good cause for fear; thy name is on every tongue in Argos.

Hel. Then free me of my fear and grant me this boon.

El. I could not bear to face my mother's grave.

Hel. And yet 'twere shame indeed to send these offerings by a servant's hand.

El. Then why not send thy daughter Hermione?

Hel. 'Tis not seemly for a tender maid to make her way amongst a crowd.

El. And yet she would thus be repaying her dead foster-mother's care.

Hel. True; thou hast convinced me, maiden. Yes, I will send my daughter; for thou art right. (Calling) Hermione, my child, come forth
before the palace; (enter hermione) take these libations and these tresses of mine in thy hands, and go pour round Clytaemnestra's
tomb a mingled cup of honey, milk, and frothing wine; then stand upon the heaped-up grave, and proclaim therefrom, "Helen, thy
sister, sends thee these libations as her gift, fearing herself to approach thy tomb from terror of the Argive mob"; and bid her
harbour kindly thoughts towards me and thee and my husband; towards these two wretched sufferers, too, whom Heaven hath
afflicted. Likewise promise that I will pay in full whatever funeral gifts are due from me to a sister. Now go, my child, and tarry not;
and soon as thou hast made the offering at the tomb, bethink thee of thy return.

                                                                                                               Exit helen and hermione.

El. O human nature, what a grievous curse thou art in this world! and what salvation, too, to those who have a goodly heritage
therein!

Did ye mark how she cut off her hair only at the ends, careful to preserve its beauty ? 'Tis the same woman as of old. May Heaven's
hate pursue thee! for thou hast proved the ruin of me and my poor brother and all Hellas.

Alack! here are my friends once more, coming to unite their plaintive dirge with mine; they will soon put an end to my brother's
peaceful sleep and cause my tears to flow when I see his frenzied fit.

                                                                                                        Enter chorus of argive maidens.

Good friends, step softly; not a sound! not a whisper! for though this kindness is well-meant, rouse him and I shall rue it.
Chorus. Hush! hush! let your footsteps fall lightly! not a sound! not a whisper!

El. Further, further from his couch! I beseech ye.

Ch. There! there! I obey.

El. Hush! hush! good friend, I pray. Soft as the breath of slender reedy pipe be thy every accent!

Ch. Hark, how soft and low I drop my voice!

El. Yes, lower thy voice e'en thus; approach now, softly, softly! Tell me what reason ye had for coming at all. 'Tis so long since he laid
him down to sleep.

Ch. How is it with him? Impart thy news, dear lady. Is it weal or woe I am to tell?

El. He is still alive, but his moans grow feeble.

Ch. What sayest thou? (Turning to orestes) Poor wretch!

El. Awake him from the deep sweet slumber he is now enjoying and thou wilt cause his death.

Ch. Ah, poor sufferer! victim of Heaven's vengeful hate!

El. Ah, misery! It seems it was a wicked utterance by a wicked god delivered, the day that Loxias from his seat upon the tripod of
Themis decreed my mother's most unnatural murder.

Ch. He stirs beneath his robe! Dost see?

El. Alas! I do; thy noisy chatter has roused him from his sleep.

Ch. Nay, methinks he slumbers still.

El. Begone! quit the house! retrace thy footsteps! a truce to this din!

Ch. He sleeps. Thou art right.

El. O Night, majestic queen, giver of sleep to toiling men, rise from the abyss of Erebus and wing thy way to the palace of
Agamemnon! For beneath our load of misery and woe we sink, aye, sink oppressed.

There! (to the chorus) that noise again! Do be still and keep that high-pitched voice of thine away from his couch; suffer him to enjoy
his sleep in peace!

Ch. Tell me, what end awaits his troubles?

El. Death, death; what else? for he does not even miss his food.

Ch. Why, then his doom is full in view.

El. Phoebus marked us out as his victims by imposing a foul unnatural task, even the shedding of the blood of our mother, who slew
our sire.

Ch. 'Twas just, but 'twas not well.

El. Dead, dead, O mother mine! and thou hast slain a father and these children of thy womb; for we are dead or as the dead. Yes,
thou art in thy grave, and more than half my life is spent in weeping and wailing and midnight lamentations; oh, look on me! a maid
unwed, unblest with babes, I drag out a jovless existence as if for ever.

Ch. My daughter Electra, from thy near station there see whether thy brother hath not passed away without thy knowing it; for I like
not his utter prostration.

Orestes. {Awaking refreshed) Sweet charm of sleep! saviour in sickness! how dear to me thy coming was! how needed! All hail,
majestic power, oblivion of woe! How wise this goddess is, how earnestly invoked by every suffering soul ! (Addressing electra)
Whence came I hither ? How is it I am here ? for I have lost all previous recollection and remember nothing.

El. Dearest brother, how glad I was to see thee fall asleep! Wouldst have me take thee in my arms and lift thy body ?
Or. Take, oh! take me in thy arms, and from this sufferer's mouth and eyes wipe off the flakes of foam.

El. Ah! 'tis a service I love; nor do I scorn with sister's hand to tend a brother's limbs.

Or. Prop me up, thy side to mine; brush the matted hair from off my face, for I see but dimly.

El. Ah, poor head! how squalid are thy locks become! How wild they look from remaining so long unwashed!

Or. Lay me once more upon the couch; when my fit leaves me, I am all unnerved, unstrung.

El. (As she lays him down) Welcome to the sick man is his couch, for painful though it be to take thereto, yet is it necessary.

Or. Set me upright once again, turn me round; it is their helplessness makes the sick so hard to please.

El. Wilt put thy feet upon the ground and take a step at last ? Change is always pleasant.

Or. That will I; for that has a semblance of health; and that seeming, though it be far from the reality, is preferable to this.

El. Hear me then, O brother mine, while yet the avenging fiends permit thee to use thy senses.

Or. Hast news to tell ? so it be good, thou dost me a kindness; but if it tend to my hurt, lo! I have sorrow enough.

El. Menelaus, thy father's brother, is arrived; in Nauplia his fleet lies at anchor.

Or. Ha! is he come to cast a ray of light upon our gloom, a man of our own kin who owes our sire a debt of gratitude?

El. Yes, he is come, and is bringing Helen with him from the walls of Troy; accept this as a sure proof of what I say.

Or. Had he returned alone in safety, he were more to be envied; for if he is bringing his wife with him, he is bringing a load of
mischief.

El. Tyndareus begat a race of daughters notorious for the shame they earned, infamous throughout Hellas.

Or. Be thou then different from that evil brood, for well thou mayest, and that not only in profession, but also in heart.

El. Ah! brother, thine eye is growing wild, and in a moment art thou passing from thy recent saneness back to frenzy.

Or. (Starting up wildly) Mother, I implore thee! let not loose on me those maidens with their bloodshot eyes and snaky hair. Ha! see,
see where they approach to leap upon me!

El. Lie still, poor sufferer, on thy couch; thine eye sees none of the things which thy fancy paints so clear.

Or. O Phoebus! they will kill me, yon hounds of hell, death's priestesses with glaring eyes, terrific goddesses.

El. I will not let thee go; but with arms twined round thee will prevent thy piteous tossing to and fro.

Or. Loose me! thou art one of those fiends that plague me, and art gripping me by the waist to hurl my body into Tartarus.

El. Woe is me! what succour can I find, seeing that we have Heaven's forces set against us?

Or. Give me my horn-tipped bow, Apollo's gift, wherewith that god declared that I should defend myself against these goddesses, if
ever they sought to scare me with wild transports of madness.

A mortal hand will wound one of these goddesses, unless she vanish from my sight. Do ye not heed me, or mark the feathered shaft
of my far-shooting bow ready to wing its flight? What! do ye linger still? Spread your pinions, skim the sky, and blame those oracles
of Phoebus.

Ah! why am I raving, panting, gasping? Whither, oh! whither have I leapt from off my couch? Once more the storm is past; I see a
calm.

Sister, why weepest thou, thy head wrapped in thy robe? I am ashamed that I should make thee a partner in my sufferings and
distress a maid like thee through sickness of mine. Cease to fret for my troubles; for though thou didst consent to it, yet 'twas I that
spilt our mother's blood. 'Tis Loxias I blame, for urging me on to do a deed most damned, encouraging me with words but no real
help; for I am sure that, had I asked my father to his face whether I was to slay my mother, he would have implored me oft and
earnestly by this beard never to plunge a murderer's sword into my mother's breast, since he would not thereby regain his life, whilst
I, poor wretch, should be doomed to drain this cup of sorrow.

E'en as it is, dear sister, unveil thy face and cease to weep, despite our abject misery; and whensoe'er thou seest me give way to
despair, be it thine to calm and soothe the terrors and distorted fancies of my brain; likewise when sorrow comes to thee, I must be
at thy side and give thee words of comfort; for to help our friends like this is a gracious task. Seek thy chamber now, poor sister; lie
down and close awhile thy sleepless eyes; take food and bathe thy body; for if thou leave me or fall sick from nursing me, my doom is
sealed; for thou art the only champion I now have, by all the rest deserted, as thou seest.

El. I leave thee! never! With thee I am resolved to live and die; for 'tis the same; if thou diest, what can I, a woman, do? How shall I
escape alone, reft of brother, sire, and friends?

Still if it be thy pleasure, I must do thy bidding. But lay thee down upon thy couch, and pay not too great heed to the terrors and
alarms that scare thee from thy rest; lie still upon thy pallet bed; for e'en though one be not sick but only fancy it, this is a source of
weariness and perplexity to mortals.

                                                                                                                            Exit ELECTRA.

Ch. Ah! ye goddesses terrific, swiftly careering on outspread pinions, whose lot it is 'mid tears and groans to hold revel not with
Bacchic rites; ye avenging spirits swarthy-hued, that dart along the spacious firmament, exacting a penalty for blood, a penalty for
murder, to you I make my suppliant prayer: suffer the son of Agamemnon to forget his wild whirling frenzy!

Ah, woe for the troublous task! which thou, poor wretch, didst strive to compass to thy ruin, listening to the voice prophetic,
proclaimed aloud by Phoebus from the tripod throughout his sanctuary, where is a secret spot they call "the navel of the earth."

O Zeus! What pity will be shown? what deadly struggle is here at hand, hurrying thee on o'er thy path of woe, victim on whom some
fiend is heaping tribulation, by bringing on thy house thy mother's bloodshed which drives thee raving mad? I weep for thee, for thee
I weep.

Great prosperity abideth not amongst mankind; but some power divine, shaking it to and fro like the sail of a swift galley, plunges it
deep in the waves of grievous affliction, boisterous and deadly as the waves of the sea. For what new family am I henceforth to
honour by preference other than that which sprung from a marriage divine, even from Tantalus?

Behold a king draws near, prince Menelaus! From his magnificence 'tis plain to see that he is a scion of the race of Tantalus.

All hail! thou that didst sail with a thousand ships to Asia's strand, and by Heaven's help accomplish all thy heart's desire, making
good-fortune a friend to thyself.

                                                                                                                          Enter menelaus.

Menelaus. All hail, my home! Some joy I feel on seeing thee again on my return from Troy, some sorrow too the sight recalls; for
never yet have I beheld a house more closely encircled by the net of dire affliction.

Concerning Agamemnon's fate and the awful death he died at his wife's hands I learnt as I was trying to put in at Malea, when the
sailors' seer from out the waves, unerring Glaucus, Nereus' spokesman, brought the news to me; for he stationed himself in full view
by our ship and thus addressed me, "Yonder, Menelaus, lies thy brother slain, plunged in a fatal bath, the last his wife will ever give
him"; filling high the cup of tears for me and my brave crew. Arrived at Nauplia, my wife already on the point of starting hither, I was
dreaming of folding Orestes, Agamemnon's son, and his mother in a fond embrace, as if 'twere well with them, when I heard a
mariner relate the murder of the daughter of Tyndareus. Tell me then, good girls, where to find the son of Agamemnon, the daring
author of that fearful crime; for he was but a babe in Clytaemnestra's arms that day I left my home to go to Troy, so that I should not
recognize him, e'en were I to see him.

Or. (Staggering towards him from the couch) Behold the object of thy inquiry, Menelaus; this is Orestes. To thee will I of mine own
accord relate my sufferings. But as the prelude to my speech I clasp thy knees in suppliant wise, seeking thus to tie¹ to thee the
prayer of lips that lack the suppliant's bough; save me, for thou art arrived at the very crisis of my trouble.

Men. Ye gods! what do I see? what death's-head greets my sight ?

Or. Thou art right; I am dead through misery, though I still gaze upon the sun.

Men. How wild the look thy unkempt hair gives thee, poor wretch!
Or. 'Tis not my looks, but my deeds that torture me.

Men. How terribly thy tearless eyeballs glare!

Or. My body is vanished and gone, though my name hath not yet deserted me.

Men. Unsightly apparition, so different from what I expected!

Or. In me behold a man that hath slain his hapless mother.

Men. I have heard all; be chary of thy tale of woe.

Or. I will; but the deity is lavish of woe in my case.

Men. What ails thee? what is thy deadly sickness?

Or. My conscience; I know that I am guilty of an awful crime.

Men. Explain thyself; wisdom is shown in clearness, not in obscurity.

Or. 'Tis grief that is my chief complaint.

Men. True; she is a goddess dire; yet are there cures for her.
¹The allusion is to the sacred wreaths worn by suppliants, one end of which they retained, while the other was fastened to the altar, thus identifying them with its
sanctity.

Or. Mad transports too, and the vengeance due to a mother's blood.

Men. When did thy fit begin? which day was it?

Or. On the day I was heaping the mound o'er my poor mother's grave.

Men. When thou wast in the house, or watching by the pyre?

Or. As I was waiting by night to gather up her bones.

Men. Was any one else there to help thee rise?

Or. Yes, Pylades who shared with me the bloody deed, my mother's murder.

Men. What phantom forms afflict thee thus?

Or. Three maidens black as night I seem to see. Men. I know of whom thou speakest, but I will not name them.

Or. Do not; they are too dread; thou wert wise to void naming them.

Men. Are these the fiends that persecute thee with the curse of kindred blood?

Or. Oh! the torment I endure from their hot pursuit!

Men. That they who have done an awful deed should be so done by is not strange.

Or. Ah, well! I must have recourse in these troubles—

Men. Speak not of dying; that were folly.

Or. To Phoebus, by whose command I shed my mother's blood.

Men. Showing a strange ignorance of what is fair and right.

Or. We must obey the gods, whatever those gods are.

Men. Spite of all this doth not Loxias help thy affliction?

Or. He will in time; to wait like this is the way with gods.

Men. How long is it since thy mother breathed her last ?
Or. This is now the sixth day; her funeral pyre is still warm.

Men. How soon the goddesses arrived to require thy mother's blood of thee!

Or. To cleverness I lay no claim, but I was a true friend to friends.

Men. Does thy father afford thee any help at all?

Or. Not as yet; and delaying to do so is, methinks, equivalent to not doing it.

Men. How dost thou stand towards the city after that deed of thine?



5 EURIPIDES: Orestes esp [255-259] 396c

Or. Had he returned alone in safety, he were more to be envied; for if he is bringing his wife with him, he is bringing a load of
mischief.

El. Tyndareus begat a race of daughters notorious for the shame they earned, infamous throughout Hellas.

Or. Be thou then different from that evil brood, for well thou mayest, and that not only in profession, but also in heart.

El. Ah! brother, thine eye is growing wild, and in a moment art thou passing from thy recent saneness back to frenzy.

Or. (Starting up wildly) Mother, I implore thee! let not loose on me those maidens with their bloodshot eyes and snaky hair. Ha! see,
see where they approach to leap upon me!

El. Lie still, poor sufferer, on thy couch; thine eye sees none of the things which thy fancy paints so clear.

Or. O Phoebus! they will kill me, yon hounds of hell, death's priestesses with glaring eyes, terrific goddesses.

El. I will not let thee go; but with arms twined round thee will prevent thy piteous tossing to and fro.

Or. Loose me! thou art one of those fiends that plague me, and art gripping me by the waist to hurl my body into Tartarus.

El. Woe is me! what succour can I find, seeing that we have Heaven's forces set against us?

Or. Give me my horn-tipped bow, Apollo's gift, wherewith that god declared that I should defend myself against these goddesses, if
ever they sought to scare me with wild transports of madness.

A mortal hand will wound one of these goddesses, unless she vanish from my sight. Do ye not heed me, or mark the feathered shaft
of my far-shooting bow ready to wing its flight? What! do ye linger still? Spread your pinions, skim the sky, and blame those oracles
of Phoebus.



5 EURIPIDES: Orestes esp [385-400] 397c-398a

Or. (Staggering towards himfrom the couch) Behold

the object of thy inquiry, Menelaus; this is Orestes.

To thee will I of mine own accord relate my sufferings.

But as the prelude to my speech I clasp thy

knees in suppliant wise, seeking thus to tie¹ to thee the prayer of lips that lack the suppliant's bough; save me, for thou art arrived at
the very crisis of my trouble.

Men. Ye gods! what do I see? what death's-head greets my sight ?

Or. Thou art right; I am dead through misery, though I still gaze upon the sun.

Men. How wild the look thy unkempt hair gives thee, poor wretch!
Or. 'Tis not my looks, but my deeds that torture me.

Men. How terribly thy tearless eyeballs glare!

Or. My body is vanished and gone, though my name hath not yet deserted me.

Men. Unsightly apparition, so different from what I expected!

Or. In me behold a man that hath slain his hapless mother.

Men. I have heard all; be chary of thy tale of woe.

Or. I will; but the deity is lavish of woe in my case.

Men. What ails thee? what is thy deadly sickness?

Or. My conscience; I know that I am guilty of an awful crime.

Men. Explain thyself; wisdom is shown in clearness, not in obscurity.

Or. 'Tis grief that is my chief complaint.

Men. True; she is a goddess dire; yet are there cures for her.
¹The allusion is to the sacred wreaths worn by suppliants, one end of which they retained, while the other was fastened to the altar, thus identifying them with its
sanctity.

Or. Mad transports too, and the vengeance due to a mother's blood.

Men. When did thy fit begin? which day was it?
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK III [978- 1023] 42d-43b
978] And those things sure enough, which are fabled to be in the deep of Acheron, do all exist for us in this life. No Tantalus, numbed
by groundless terror, as the story is, fears poor wretch a huge stone hanging in air; but in life rather a baseless dread of the god vexes
mortals: the fall they fear is such fall of luck as chance brings to each. Nor do birds eat a way into Tityos laid in Acheron, nor can they
sooth to say find during eternity food to peck under his large breast. However huge the bulk of body he extends, though such as to
take up with outspread limbs not nine acres merely, but the whole earth, yet will he not be able to endure everlasting pain and
supply food from his own body for ever. But he is for us a Tityos, whom, as he grovels in love, vultures rend and bitter bitter anguish
eats up or troubled thoughts from any other passion do rive. In life too we have a Sisyphus before our eyes who is bent on asking
from the people the rods and cruel axes, and always retires defeated and disappointed. For to ask for power, which empty as it is is
never given, and always in the chase of it to undergo severe toil, this is forcing up-hill with much effort a stone which after all rolls
back again from the summit and seeks in headlong haste the levels of the plain. Then to be ever feeding the thankless nature of the
mind, and never to fill it full and sate it with good things, as the seasons of the year do for us, when they come round and bring their
fruits and varied delights, though after all we are never filled with the enjoyments of life, this methinks is to do what is told of the
maidens in the flower of their age, to keep pouring water into a perforated vessel which in spite of all can never be filled full.
Moreover Cerberus and the furies and yon privation of light are idle tales, as well as all the rest, Ixion's wheel and black Tartarus
belching forth hideous fires from his throat: things which nowhere are nor sooth to say can be. But there is in life a dread of
punishment for evil deeds, signal as the deeds are signal, and for atonement of guilt, the prison and the frightful hurling down from
the rock, scourgings, executioners, the dungeon of the doomed, the pitch, the metal plate, torches; and even though these are
wanting, yet the conscience stricken mind through boding fears applies to itself goads and frightens itself with whips, and sees not
meanwhile what end there can be of ills or what limit at last is to be set to punishments, and fears lest these very evils be enhanced
after death. The life of fools at length becomes a hell here on earth.
27 SHAKESPEARE: Macbeth, ACT V, SC I 306b-307a
                                                                   ACT V

                                                Scene I . Dunsinane: ante-room in the castle

                                           Enter a doctor of physic and a waiting-gentlewoman.

Doct. I have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your report. When was it she last walked?

Gent. Since his Majesty went into the field, I have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take
forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep. 9

Doct. A great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching! In this slumbery
agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?

Gent. That, sir, which I will not report after her.

Doct. You may to me; and 'tis most meet you should.

Gent. Neither to you nor any one; having no witness to confirm my speech.                                                   21

Enter lady macbeth, with a taper.

Lo you, here she comes! This is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast asleep. Observe her; stand close.

Doct. How came she by that light?

Gent. Why, it stood by her. She has light by her continually; 'tis her command.

Doct. You see, her eyes are open.

Gent. Ay, but their sense is shut.

Doct. What is it she does now? Look, how she rubs her hands.                                                                 31

Gent. It is an accustomed action with her, to seem thus washing her hands. I have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.

Lady M. Yet here's a spot.

Doct. Hark! she speaks. I will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.

Lady M. Out, damned spot! out, I say! One; two. Why, then 'tis time to do't. Hell is murky! Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard?
What need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account? Yet who would have thought the old man to have had
so much blood in him.

Doct. Do you mark that?

Lady M. The thane of Fife had a wife. Where is she now? What, will these hands ne'er be clean? No more o' that, my lord, no more o'
that! You mar all with this starting.                                                                                      50

Doct. Go to, go to; you have known what you should not.

Gent. She has spoke what she should not, I am sure of that. Heaven knows what she has known.

Lady M. Here's the smell of the blood still. All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh!

Doct. WTiat a sigh is there! The heart is sorely charged.                                                                   60

Gent. I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.

Doct. Well, well, well—

Gent. Pray God it be, sir.
Doct. This disease is beyond my practice. Yet I have known those which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their beds.

Lady M. Wash your hands, put on your nightgown; look not so pale. I tell you yet again, Banquo's buried; he cannot come out on's
grave.

Doct. Even so?                                                                                                               72

Lady M. To bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate. Come, come, come, come, give me your hand. What's done cannot be undone.
To bed, to bed, to bed!

                                                                                                                                  [Exit.

Doct. Will she go now to bed? Gent. Directly.

Doct. Foul whisperings are abroad. Unnatural deeds

Do breed unnatural troubles. Infected minds                                                                                  80
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets.
More needs she the divine than the physician.
God, God forgive us all! Look after her;
Remove from her the means of all annoyance,
And still keep eyes upon her. So, good night.
My mind she has mated, and amazed my sight.
I think, but dare not speak.
Gent. Good night, good doctor.

                                                                                                                             [Exeunt.
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 1b-5a esp 3a, 4a; 3b-9a / Hysteria,
25a-26a; 31b-38d; 43b-49b esp 46c-d; 54b-59d esp 58b-c; 83a; 83d-85d esp 84b; 116b-118a,c
/ Interpretation of Dreams, 200a-d; 370b-c / Repression, 425c-427a,c/ Unconscious, 440b-
442b / General Introduction, 550d-557a; 558d-562c esp 559d-560a, 562b-c; 568a-569c; 571d-
572c; 593b-594c; 596d-597b; 609c-615b esp 612c-d, 615a-b / Inhibitions, Symptoms. and
Anxiety, 718a-747b esp 719b-c, 720a, 721a, 721c, 723c, 724a-727c, 729a-b, 731d-732d, 742a-
c / New Introductory Lectures, 841a-843c esp 841b-d; 848b-849b; 852a-b
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 1b-5a

But first one word. I have noticed, with considerable satisfaction, that the majority of my hearers do not belong to the medical
profession. Now do not fear that a medical education is necessary to follow what I shall have to say. We shall now accompany the
doctors a little way, but soon we shall take leave of them and follow Dr. Breuer on a way which is quite his own.

Dr. Breuer's patient was a girl of twenty-one, of a high degree of intelligence. She had developed in the course of her two years'
illness a series of physical and mental disturbances which well deserved to be taken seriously. She had a severe paralysis of both right
extremities, with anaesthesia, and at times the same affection of the members of the left side of the body; disturbance of eye-
movements, and much impairment of vision; difficulty in maintaining the position of the head, an intense Tussis nervosa, nausea
when she attempted to, take nourishment, and at one time for several weeks a loss of the power to drink, in spite of tormenting
thirst.

Her power of speech was also diminished, and this progressed so far that she could neither speak nor understand her mother
tongue; and, finally, she was subject to states of "absence," of confusion, delirium, alteration of her whole personality. These states
will later claim our attention.

When one hears of such a case, one does not need to be a physician to incline to the opinion that we are concerned here with a
serious injury, probably of the brain, for which there is little hope of cure and which will probably lead to the early death of the
patient. The doctors will tell us, however, that in one type of cases with just as unfavourable symptoms, another, far more favourable,
opinion is justified. When one finds such a series of symptoms in the case of a young girl, whose vital organs (heart, kidneys) are
shown by objective tests to be normal, but who has suffered from strong emotional disturbances, and when the symptoms differ in
certain finer characteristics from what one might logically expect, in a case like this the doctors are not too much disturbed. They
consider that there is present no organic lesion of the brain, but that enigmatical state known since the time of the Greek physicians
as hysteria, which can simulate a whole series of symptoms of various diseases. They consider in such a case that the life of the
patient is not in danger and that a restoration to health will probably come about of itself. The differentiation of such an hysteria
from a severe organic lesion is not always very easy. But we do not need to know how a differential diagnosis of this kind is made;
you may be sure that the case of Breuer's patient was such that no skillful physician could fail to diagnose an hysteria. We may also
add a word here from the history of the case. The illness first appeared while the patient was caring for her father, whom she
tenderly loved, during the severe illness which led to his death, a task which she was compelled to abandon because she herself fell
ill.

So far it has seemed best to go with the doctors, but we shall soon part company with them.

You must not think that the outlook of a patient with regard to medical aid is essentially bettered when the diagnosis points to
hysteria rather than to organic disease of the brain. Against the serious brain diseases medical skill is in most cases powerless, but
also in the case of hysterical affections the doctor can do nothing. He must leave it to benign nature, when and how his hopeful
prognosis will be realized.¹ Accordingly, with the recognition of the disease as hysteria, little is changed in the situation of the patient,
but there is a great change in the attitude of the doctor. We can observe that he acts quite differently toward hystericals than toward
patients suffering from organic diseases. He will not bring the same interest to the former as to the latter, since their suffering is
much less serious and yet seems to set up the claim to be valued just as seriously.

But there is another motive in this action. The physician, who through his studies has learned so much that is hidden from the laity,
can realize in his thought the causes and alterations of the brain disorders in patients suffering from apoplexy or dementia, a
representation which must be right up to a certain point, for by it he is enabled to understand the nature of each symptom. But
before the details of hysterical symptoms, all his knowledge, his anatomical-physiological and pathological education, desert him. He
cannot understand hysteria. He is in the same position before it as the layman. And that is not agreeable to anyone, who is in the
habit of setting such a high valuation upon his knowledge. Hystericals, accordingly, tend to lose his sympathy; he considers them
persons who overstep the laws of his science, as the orthodox regard heretics; he ascribes to them all possible evils, blames them for
exaggeration and intentional deceit, "simulation," and he punishes them by withdrawing his interest.

Now Dr. Breuer did not deserve this reproach in this case; he gave his patient sympathy and interest, although at first he did not
understand how to help her. Probably this was easier for him on account of those superior qualities of the patient's mind and
character to which he bears witness in his account of the case.

His sympathetic observation soon found the means which made the first help possible. It had been noticed that the patient, in her
states of "absence," of psychic alteration, usually mum
¹I know that this view no longer holds today, but in the lecture I take myself and my hearers back to the time before 1886. If things have become different since that
time it has been largely due to the work the history of which I am sketching.

bled over several words to herself. These seemed to spring from associations with which her thoughts were busy. The doctor, who
was able to get these words, put her in a sort of hypnosis and repeated them to her over and over, in order to bring up any
associations that they might have. The patient yielded to his suggestion and reproduced for him those psychic creations which
controlled her thoughts during her "absences," and which betrayed themselves in these single spoken words. These were fancies,
deeply sad, often poetically beautiful, day dreams, we might call them, which commonly took as their starting point the situation of a
girl beside the sick-bed of her father. Whenever she had related a number of such fancies, she was, as it were, freed and restored to
her normal mental life. This state of health would last for several hours, and then give place on the next day to a new "absence,"
which was removed in the same way by relating the newly created fancies. It was impossible not to get the impression that the
psychic alteration which was expressed in the "absence" was a consequence of the excitations originating from these intensely
emotion al fancy-images. The patient herself, who at this time of her illness strangely enough understood and spoke only English,
gave this new kind of treatment the name "talking cure," or jokingly designated it as "chimney sweeping."

The doctor soon hit upon the fact that through such cleansing of the soul more could be accomplished than a temporary removal of
the constantly recurring mental clouds. Symptoms of the disease would disappear when in hypnosis the patient could be made to
remember the situation and the associative connexions under which they first appeared, provided free vent was given to the
emotions which they aroused. "There was in the summer a time of intense heat, and the patient had suffered very much from thirst;
for, without any apparent reason, she had suddenly become unable to drink. She would take a glass of water in her hand, but as soon
as it touched her lips she would push it away as though suffering from hydrophobia. Obviously for these few seconds she was in her
absent state. She ate only fruit, melons and the like, in order to relieve this tormenting thirst. When this had been going on about six
weeks, she was talking one day in hypnosis about her English governess, whom she disliked, and finally told, with every sign of
disgust, how she had come into the room of the governess, and how that lady's little dog, that she abhorred, had drunk out of a
glass. Out of respect for the conventions, the patient had remained silent.

Now, after she had given energetic expression to her restrained anger, she asked for a drink, drank a large quantity of water without
trouble, and woke from hypnosis with the glass at her lips. The symptom thereupon vanished permanently."¹

Permit me to dwell for a moment on this experience. No one had ever cured an hysterical symptom by such means before, or had
come so near understanding its cause. This would be a pregnant discovery if the expectation could be confirmed that still other,
perhaps the majority of symptoms, originated in this way and could be removed by the same method. Breuer spared no pains to
convince himself of this and investigated the pathogenesis of the other more serious symptoms in a more orderly way. Such was in
deed the case; almost all the symptoms originated in exactly this way, as remnants, as precipitates, if you like, of affectively toned
experiences, which for that reason we later called psychic traumata. The nature of the symptoms became clear through their relation
to the scene which caused them. They were, to use the technical term, determined (determiniert) by the scene whose memory
traces they embodied, and so could no longer be described as arbitrary or enigmatical functions of the neurosis.

Only one variation from what might be expected must be mentioned. It was not always a single experience which occasioned the
symptom, but usually several, perhaps many similar, repeated traumata cooperated in this effect. It was necessary to repeat the
whole series of pathogenic memories in chronological sequence, and, of course, in reverse order, the last first and the first last. It was
quite impossible to reach the first and often most essential trauma directly, without first clearing away those coming later.

You will, of course, want to hear me speak of other examples of the causation of hysterical symptoms beside this of inability to drink
on account of the disgust caused by the dog drinking from the glass. I must, however, if I hold to my program, limit myself to very few
examples. Breuer relates, for instance, that his patient's visual disturbances could be traced back to external causes, in the following
way: "The patient, with tears in her eyes, was sitting by the sick-bed when her father suddenly asked her what time it was. She could
not see distinctly, strained her eyes to see, brought the watch near her eyes so that the dial seemed very large (macropia and
strabismus conv.), or else she tried
¹Studien uber Hysterie, 2d ed., p. 26.

hard to suppress her tears, so that the sick man might not see them."²

All the pathogenic impressions sprang from the time when she shared in the care of her sick father. "Once she was watching at night
in the greatest anxiety for the patient, who was in a high fever, and in suspense, for a surgeon was expected from Vienna, to operate
on the patient. Her mother had gone out for a little while, and Anna sat by the sick-bed, her right arm hanging over the back of her
chair. She fell into a revery and saw a black snake emerge, as it were, from the wall and approach the sick man as though to bite him.
(It is very probable that several snakes had actually been seen in the meadow behind the house, that she had already been
frightened by them, and that these former experiences furnished the material for the hallucination.) She tried to drive off the
creature, but was as though paralyzed. Her right arm, which was hanging over the back of the chair, had "gone to sleep," become
anaesthetic and paretic, and as she was looking at it, the fingers changed into little snakes with deaths-heads. (The nails.) Probably
she attempted to drive away the snake with her paralyzed right hand, and so the anaesthesia and paralysis of this member formed
associations with the snake hallucination. When this had vanished, she tried in her anguish to speak, but could not. She could not
express herself in any language, until finally she thought of the words of an English nursery song, and thereafter she could think and
speak only in this language."³ When the memory of this scene was revived in hypnosis, the paralysis of the right arm, which had
existed since the beginning of the illness, was cured and the treatment ended.

When, a number of years later, I began to use Breuer's researches and treatment on my own patients, my experiences completely
coincided with his. In the case of a woman of about forty, there was a tic, a peculiar smacking noise which manifested itself
whenever she was labouring under any excitement, without any obvious cause. It had its origin in two experiences which had this
common element, that she attempted to make no noise, but that by a sort of counter will this noise broke the stillness. On the first
occasion, she had finally after much trouble put her sick child to sleep, and she tried to be very quiet so as not to awaken it. On the
second occasion, during a ride with both her children in a thunderstorm, the horses took fright, and she
²Ibid., p. 30.
³Ibid., p. 31 [see also p. 25 below.]



carefully avoided any noise for fear of frightening them still more.¹ I give this example instead of many others which are cited in the
Studien uber Hysterie.

Ladies and gentlemen, if you will permit me to generalize, as is indispensable in so brief a presentation, we may express our results
up to this point in the formula: Our hysterical patients suffer from reminiscences. Their symptoms are the remnants and the memory
symbols of certain (traumatic) experiences.

A comparison with other memory symbols from other sources will perhaps enable us better to understand this symbolism. The
memorials and monuments with which we adorn our great cities are also such memory symbols. If you walk through London you will
find before one of the greatest railway stations of the city a richly decorated Gothic pillar—Charing Cross. One of the old Plantagenet
kings, in the thirteenth century, caused the body of his beloved queen Eleanor to be borne to Westminster, and had Gothic crosses
erected at each of the stations where the coffin was set down. Charing Cross is the last of these monuments, which preserve the
memory of this sad journey.² In another part of the city, you will see a high pillar of more modern construction, which is merely
called "the Monument." This is in memory of the great fire which broke out in the neighborhood in the year 1666, and destroyed a
great part of the city. These monuments are memory symbols like the hysterical symptoms; so far the comparison seems justified.
But what would you say to a Londoner who today stood sadly before the monument to the funeral of Queen Eleanor, instead of
going about his business with the haste engendered by modern industrial conditions, or rejoicing with the young queen of his own
heart? Or to another, who before "the Monument" bemoaned the burning of his loved native city, which long since has arisen again
so much more splendid than before?

Now hystericals and all neurotics behave like these two unpractical Londoners, not only in that they remember the painful
experiences of the distant past, but because they are still strongly affected by them. They cannot escape from the past and neglect
present reality in its favour. This fixation of the mental life on the
¹Ibid., pp. 43-46. [See also p. 25. below.] A selection from this book, augmented by several later treatises on hysteria, lies before me, in an English translation by Dr. A.
A. Brill, of New York. It bears the title, Selected Papers on Hysteria and Other Psychoneuroses, 1909.
²Or rather the later copy of such a monument. The name "Charing" is itself, as Dr. E. Jones tells me, derived from the words chere reine.



pathogenic traumata is an essential, and practically a most significant characteristic of the neurosis. I will willingly concede the
objection which you are probably formulating, as you think over the history of Breuer's patient. All her traumata originated at the
time when she was caring for her sick father, and her symptoms could only be regarded as memory symbols of his sickness and
death. They correspond to mourning, and a fixation on thoughts of the dead so short a time after death is certainly not pathological,
but rather corresponds to normal emotional behavior. I concede this: there is nothing abnormal in the fixation of feeling on the
trauma shown by Breuer's patient. But in other cases, like that of the tic that I have mentioned, the occasions for which lay ten and
fifteen years back, the characteristic of this abnormal clinging to the past is very clear, and Breuer's patient would probably have
developed it, if she had not come under the "cathartic treatment" such a short time after the traumatic experiences and the
beginning of the disease.

We have so far only explained the relation of the hysterical symptoms to the life history of the patient; now by considering two
further factors which Breuer observed, we may get a hint as to the processes of the beginning of the illness and those of the cure.
With regard to the first, it is especially to be noted that Breuer's patient in almost all pathogenic situations had to suppress a strong
excitement, instead of giving vent to it by appropriate words and deeds. In the little experience with her governess' dog, she
suppressed, through regard for the conventions, all manifestations of her very intense dis gust. While she was seated by her father's
sick bed, she was careful to betray nothing of her anxiety and her painful depression to the patient. When, later, she reproduced the
same scene before the physician, the emotion which she had suppressed on the occurrence of the scene burst out with especial
strength, as though it had been pent up all along. The symptom which had been caused by that scene reached its greatest intensity
while the doctor was striving to revive the memory of the scene, and vanished after it had been fully laid bare. On the other hand,
experience shows that if the patient is reproducing the traumatic scene to the physician, the process has no curative effect if, by
some peculiar, chance,. there is no development of emotion. It is apparently these emotional processes upon which the illness of the
patient and the restoration to health are dependent. We feel justified in regarding emotion as a quantity which may become
increased, derived and displaced. So we are forced to the conclusion that the patient fell ill because the emotion developed in the
pathogenic situation was prevented from escaping normally, and that the essence of the sickness lies in the fact that these
imprisoned (eingeklemmt) emotions undergo a series of abnormal changes. In part they are preserved as a lasting charge and as a
source of constant disturbance in psychical life; in part they undergo a change into unusual bodily innervations and inhibitions, which
present themselves as the physical symptoms of the case. We have coined the name hysterical conversion for the latter process. Part
of our mental energy is, under normal conditions, conducted off by way of physical innervation and gives what we call the expression
of emotions. Hysterical conversion exaggerates this part of the course of a mental process which is emotionally coloured; it
corresponds to a far more intense emotional expression, which finds outlet by new paths. If a stream flows in two channels, an
overflow of one will take place as soon as the current in the other meets with an obstacle.

You see that we are in a fair way to arrive at a purely psychological theory of hysteria, in which we assign the first rank to the affective
processes. A second observation of Breuer compels us to ascribe to the altered condition of consciousness a great part in
determining the characteristics of the disease. His patient showed many sorts of mental states, conditions of "absence," confusion
and alteration of character, besides her normal state. In her normal state she was entirely ignorant of the pathogenic scenes and of
their connection with her symptoms. She had forgotten those scenes, or at any rate had dissociated them from their pathogenic
connection. When the patient was hypnotized, it was possible, after considerable difficulty, to recall those scenes to her memory, and
by this means of recall, the symptoms were removed. It would have been extremely perplexing to know how to interpret this fact, if
hypnotic practice and experiments had not pointed out the way. Through the study of hypnotic phenomena, the conception, strange
though it was at first, has become familiar, that in one and the same individual several mental groupings are possible, which may
remain relatively independent of each other, know nothing of each other, and which may cause a splitting of consciousness along
lines which they lay down. Cases of such a sort, known as double personality (double conscience), occasionally appear
spontaneously.

If, in such a division of personality, conscious ness remains constantly bound up with one of the two states, this is called the
conscious mental state, and the other the unconscious. In the well-known phenomena of so-called post hypnotic suggestion, in
which a command given in hypnosis is later executed in the normal state as though by an imperative suggestion, we have an
excellent basis for understanding how the unconscious state can influence the conscious, although the latter is ignorant of the
existence of the former. In the same way it is quite possible to explain the facts in hysterical cases. Breuer came to the conclusion
that the hysterical symptoms originated in such peculiar mental states, which he called hypnoidal states (hypnoide Zustande).
Experiences of an emotional nature, which occur during such hypnoidal states, easily become pathogenic, since such states do not
present the conditions for a normal draining off of the emotion of the exciting processes. And as a result there arises a peculiar
product of this exciting process, that is, the symptom, and this is projected like a foreign body into the normal state. The latter has,
then, no conception of the significance of the hypnoidal pathogenic situation. Where a symptom arises, we also find an amnesia, a
memory gap, and the filling of this gap includes the removal of the conditions under which the symptom originated.



54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, esp 3a

Permit me to dwell for a moment on this experience. No one had ever cured an hysterical symptom by such means before, or had
come so near understanding its cause. This would be a pregnant discovery if the expectation could be confirmed that still other,
perhaps the majority of symptoms, originated in this way and could be removed by the same method. Breuer spared no pains to
convince himself of this and investigated the pathogenesis of the other more serious symptoms in a more orderly way. Such was in
deed the case; almost all the symptoms originated in exactly this way, as remnants, as precipitates, if you like, of affectively toned
experiences, which for that reason we later called psychic traumata. The nature of the symptoms became clear through their relation
to the scene which caused them. They were, to use the technical term, determined (determiniert) by the scene whose memory
traces they embodied, and so could no longer be described as arbitrary or enigmatical functions of the neurosis.

Only one variation from what might be expected must be mentioned. It was not always a single experience which occasioned the
symptom, but usually several, perhaps many similar, repeated traumata cooperated in this effect. It was necessary to repeat the
whole series of pathogenic memories in chronological sequence, and, of course, in reverse order, the last first and the first last. It was
quite impossible to reach the first and often most essential trauma directly, without first clearing away those coming later.



54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, esp 4a

Ladies and gentlemen, if you will permit me to generalize, as is indispensable in so brief a presentation, we may express our results
up to this point in the formula: Our hysterical patients suffer from reminiscences. Their symptoms are the remnants and the memory
symbols of certain (traumatic) experiences.

A comparison with other memory symbols from other sources will perhaps enable us better to understand this symbolism. The
memorials and monuments with which we adorn our great cities are also such memory symbols. If you walk through London you will
find before one of the greatest railway stations of the city a richly decorated Gothic pillar—Charing Cross. One of the old Plantagenet
kings, in the thirteenth century, caused the body of his beloved queen Eleanor to be borne to Westminster, and had Gothic crosses
erected at each of the stations where the coffin was set down. Charing Cross is the last of these monuments, which preserve the
memory of this sad journey.² In another part of the city, you will see a high pillar of more modern construction, which is merely
called "the Monument." This is in memory of the great fire which broke out in the neighborhood in the year 1666, and destroyed a
great part of the city. These monuments are memory symbols like the hysterical symptoms; so far the comparison seems justified.
But what would you say to a Londoner who today stood sadly before the monument to the funeral of Queen Eleanor, instead of
going about his business with the haste engendered by modern industrial conditions, or rejoicing with the young queen of his own
heart? Or to another, who before "the Monument" bemoaned the burning of his loved native city, which long since has arisen again
so much more splendid than before?
²Or rather the later copy of such a monument. The name "Charing" is itself, as Dr. E. Jones tells me, derived from the words chere reine.



54 FREUD: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis, 8b-9a

Now do not attempt to bring the case of Breuer's patient under the point of view of re pression. This history cannot be subjected to
such an attempt, for it was gained with the help of hypnotic influence. Only when hypnosis, is excluded can you see the resistances
and repressions and get a correct idea of the pathogenic process. Hypnosis conceals the resistances and so makes a certain part of
the mental field freely accessible. By this same process the resistances on the borders of this field are heaped up into a rampart,
which makes all beyond inaccessible.

The most valuable things that we have learned from Breuer's observations were his conclusions as to the connection of the
symptoms with the pathogenic experiences or psychic traumata, and we must, not neglect to evaluate this result properly from the
standpoint of the repression theory. It is not at first evident how we can get from the repression to the creation of the symptoms.
Instead of giving a complicated theoretical derivation, I will return at this point to the illustration which I used to typify repression.
Remember that, with the ejection of the rowdy and the establishment of the watchers before the door, the affair is not necessarily
ended. It may very well happen that the ejected man, now embittered and quite careless of consequences, gives us more to do. He is
no longer among us, we are free from his presence, his scornful laugh, his half-audible remarks, but in a certain sense the repression
has miscarried, for he makes a terrible uproar outside, and by his outcries and by hammering on the door with his fists interferes
with my lecture more than before. Under these circumstances it would be hailed with delight if possibly our honoured president, Dr.
Stanley Hall, should take upon himself the role of peacemaker and mediator. He would speak with the rowdy on the outside, and
then turn to us with the recommendation that we let him in again, provided he would guarantee to behave himself better. On Dr.
Hall's authority we decide to stop the repression, and now quiet and peace reign again. This is, in fact, a fairly good presentation of
the task devolving upon the physician in the psycho-analytic therapy of neu roses. To say the same thing more directly: we come to
the conclusion, from working with hysterical patients and other neurotics, that they have not fully succeeded in repressing the idea
to which the incompatible wish is attached. They have, indeed, driven it out of consciousness and out of memory, and apparently
saved themselves a great amount of psychic pain, but in the unconscious the suppressed wish still exists, only waiting for its chance
to become active, and finally succeeds in sending into consciousness, instead of the repressed idea, a disguised and unrecognizable
surrogate-creation (Ersatzbildung), to which the same painful sensations as sociate themselves that the patient thought he was rid of
through his repression. This surrogate of the suppressed idea—the symptom—is secure against further attacks from the defenses of
the ego, and instead of a short conflict there originates now a permanent suffering. We can observe in the symptom, besides the
tokens of its disguise, a remnant of: traceable similarity with the originally repressed idea;, the way in which the surrogate is built up
can be discovered during, the psycho-analytic treatment of the patient, and for his cure the symptom must be traced back over the
same route to the repressed idea. If this repressed material is once more made part of the conscious mental functions—a process
which supposes the overcoming of considerable resistance—the psychic conflict which then arises, the same which the patient
wished to avoid, is made capable of a happier termination, under the guidance of the physician, than is offered by repression. There
are several possible suitable decisions which can bring conflict and neurosis to a happy end; in particular cases the attempt may be
made to combine several of these. Either the personality of the patient may be convinced; that he has been wrong in rejecting the
pathogenic wish, and he may be made to accept it either wholly or in part; or this wish may itself be directed to a higher goal which
is free from objection, by what is called sublimation (Sublimierung):, or the rejection, may be recognized as rightly motivated,. and
the automatic and therefore insufficient mechanism of repression be reinforced by the higher, more characteristically human, mental
faculties: one succeeds in mastering his wishes by conscious thought.

Forgive me if I have not been able to present more clearly these main points of the. Treatment which is today known as psycho-
analysis. The difficulties do not lie merely in the newness of the subject.

Regarding the nature of the unacceptable wishes, which succeed in making their influence felt out of the unconscious, in spite of
repression ; and regarding the question of what subjective and constitutional factors must be present for such a failure of repression
and such a surrogate or sympton creation to take place, we will speak in later remarks.



54 FREUD: Hysteria, 25a-26a

                                                             FIFTH LECTURE

Ladies and Gentlemen : With the discovery of infantile sexuality and the tracing back of the neurotic symptoms to erotic impulse-
components we have arrived at several unexpected formulae for expressing the nature and tendencies of neurotic diseases. We see
that the individual falls ill when in consequence of outer hindrances or inner lack of adaptability the satisfaction of the erotic needs
in the sphere of reality is denied. We see that he then flees to sickness, in order to find with its help a surrogate satisfaction for that
denied him. We recognize that the symptoms of illness contain fractions of the sexual activity of the individual, or his whole sexual
life, and we find in the turning away from reality the chief tendency and also the chief in jury of the sickness. We may guess that the
resistance of our patients against the cure is not a simple one, but is composed of many motives. Not only does the ego of the
patient strive against the giving up of the repression by which it has changed itself from its original constitution into its present form,
but also the sexual impulses may not renounce their surrogate satisfaction so long as it is not certain that they can be offered
anything better in the sphere of reality.

The flight from the unsatisfying reality into what we call, on account of its biologically injurious nature, disease, but which is never
with out an individual gain in pleasure for the patient, takes place over the path of regression, the return to earlier phases of the
sexual life, when satisfaction was not lacking. This regression is seemingly a twofold one, a temporal, in so far as the libido or erotic
need falls back to a temporally earlier stage of development, and a formal, since the original and primitive psychic means of
expression are applied to the expression of this need. Both sorts of regression focus in childhood and have their common point in the
production of an infantile condition of sexual life.

The deeper you penetrate into the pathogenic of neurotic diseases, the more the connexion of neuroses with other products of
human mentality, even the most valuable, will be revealed to you. You will be reminded that we men, with the high claims of our
civilization and under the pressure of our repressions, find reality generally quite unsatisfactory and so keep up a life of fancy in
which we love to compensate for what is lacking in the sphere of reality by the production of wish-fulfilments. In these phantasies is
often contained very much of the particular constitutional essence of personality and of its tendencies, repressed in real life. The
energetic and successful man is he who succeeds by dint of labour in transforming his wish fancies into reality. Where this is not
successful, in consequence of the resistance of the outer world and the weakness of the individual, there begins the turning away
from reality. The individual takes refuge in his satisfying world of fancy. Under certain favourable conditions it still remains possible
for him to find another connecting link between these fancies and reality, instead of permanently becoming a stranger to it through
the regression into the infantile. If the individual who is displeased with reality is in possession of that artistic talent which is still a
psychological riddle, he can transform his fancies into artistic creations. So he escapes the fate of a neurosis and wins back his
connection with reality by this roundabout way.¹ Where this opposition to the real world exists, but this valuable talent fails or proves
insufficient, it is unavoidable that the libido, following the origin of the fancies, succeeds by means of regression in revivifying the
infantile wishes and so producing a neurosis. The neurosis takes, in our time, the place of the cloister, in which were accustomed to
take refuge all those whom life had undeceived or who felt themselves too weak for life. Let me give at this point the main result at
which we have arrived by the psycho-analytic investigation of neurotics, namely, that neuroses have no peculiar psychic content of
their own, which is not also to be found in healthy states; or as C. G.
¹Cf. Otto Rank, Der Kunstler, Ausdtze zu einer Sexual-Psychologie, 56 pp., Heller & Co., Vienna, 1907.

Jung has expressed it, neurotics fall ill of the same complexes with which we sound people struggle. It depends on quantitative
relation ships, on the relations of the forces wrestling with each other, whether the struggle leads to health, to a neurosis, or to
compensatory over functioning (Uberleistung).

Ladies and gentlemen, I have still withheld from you the most remarkable experience which corroborates our assumptions of the
sexual impulse-forces of neurotics. Every time that we treat a neurotic psycho-analytically, there occurs in him the so-called
phenomenon of transfer (Ubertragung), that is, he applies to the per son of the physician a great amount of tender emotion, often
mixed with enmity, which has no foundation in any real relation, and must be derived in every respect from the old wish-fancies of
the patient, which have become unconscious. Every fragment of his emotive life, which can no longer be called back into memory, is
accordingly lived over by the patient in his relations to the physician, and only by such a living over of them in the transfer is he
convinced of the existence and the power of these unconscious sexual excitations. The symptoms, which, to use a simile from
chemistry, are the precipitates of earlier love experiences (in the widest sense), can only be dissolved in the higher temperature of
the experience of transfer and transformed in to other psychic products. The physician plays in this reaction, to use an excellent
expression of S. Ferenczi,¹ the role of a catalytic ferment, which temporarily attracts to itself the affection which has become free in
the course of the process.
¹S. Ferenczi, "Introjektion und U"bertragung," Jahrbuch f. Psychoanal.u. Psychopath,Forschungen. Vol. I, No. 2,1909.




54 FREUD: Hysteria, 31b-38d

But the causal connexion of the causative psychic trauma with the hysterical phenomena does not mean that the trauma, as an agent
provocateur, would release the symptom, which would then become independent and continue as such. On the contrary, we must
maintain that the psychic trauma of the memory of the same acts like a foreign body which even long after its penetration must be
considered as an agent of the present, the proof of which we see in a most remarkable phenomenon, which at the same time adds
to our discoveries a distinctly practical interest.

We found, at first to our greatest surprise, that the individual hysterical symptoms immediately disappeared without returning if we
succeeded in thoroughly awakening the memories of the causal process with its accompanying affect, and if the patient
circumstantially discussed the process in the most detailed manner and gave verbal expression to the affect. Recollections without
affects are almost utterly useless. The psychic process which originally elapsed must be reproduced as vividly as possible so as to
bring it back into the statum nascendi,¹ and then thoroughly "talked out." If it concerns such irritating manifestations as convulsions,
neuralgias, and hallucinations, they are once more brought to the surface with their full intensity, and they then vanish forever.
Functional attacks like paralyses and anaesthesias likewise disappear, but naturally without any appreciable distinctness of their
momentary aggravation.²

It would be quite reasonable to suspect that one deals here with an unintentional suggestion. The patient expects to be relieved of
his suffering and it is this expectation and not the discussion that is the effectual factor. But this is not so. The first observation of this
kind, in which a most complicated case of hysteria was analysed and the individual causal symptoms separately abrogated, occurred
in the year 1881, that is, in a pre-suggestive period. It was brought about through a spontaneous auto-hypnosis of the patient and
caused the examiner the greatest surprise.

In reversing the sentence: cessante causa cessat effectus,³ we may conclude from this observation that the causal process continues
to act
¹Condition of birth. —Ed.
²The possibility of such a therapy was clearly recognized by Delboeuf and Binet, as is shown by the accompanying quotations. Delboeuf, Le magnetisme anumal (Paris,
1889): "After this, one will understand how the hypnotizer helps the cure. He puts the patient back into the condition in which the disease manifested itself and fights
by word the same disease as it is being re-born." Binet, Les alterations de la personalite (1892), p. 243: ". . . Perhaps one will see that by this mental trick taking the
patient back to the very moment when the symptom first appeared, the patient is made more receptive to curative suggestion." In the interesting book of Janet, L’
Automatism psychologique (Paris, 1899), we find the description of a cure brought about in a hysterical girl by a process similar to our method.
³The cause stopping, the effect is stopped.



in some way even after years, not indirectly by means of a chain of causal links, but directly as a provoking cause, just perhaps as in
the wakeful consciousness where the memory of a psychic pain may later call forth tears. In other words: The hysteric suffers mostly
from reminiscences.¹

                                                                                    II

It would seem at first rather strange that long-forgotten experiences should exert so in tensive an influence, and that their
recollections should not be subject to the decay into which all our memories sink. We will perhaps gain some understanding of these
facts by the following examinations.

The blurring or loss of an affect of memory depends on a great many factors. In the first place, it is of great consequence whether
there was an energetic reaction to the affectful experience or not. By reaction we here understand a whole series of voluntary or
involuntary reflexes, ranging from crying to an act of revenge, through which, according to experience, affects are discharged. If the
success of this reaction is of sufficient strength, it results in the disappearance of a great part of the affect. Language at tests to this
fact of daily observation in such expressions as "to give vent to one's feeling," to be "relieved by weeping," etc. If the reaction is
suppressed, the affect remains united with the memory. An insult retaliated, be it only in words, is differently recalled than one that
had to be taken in silence. Language also recognizes this distinction between the psychic and physical results, and designates most
characteristic ally the silently endured suffering as grievance. The reaction of an injured person to a trauma has really only then a
perfect "cathartic" effect if it is expressed in an adequate reaction like revenge. But man finds a substitute for this action in speech
through which help the affect can well-nigh be ab-reacted (abreagirt).² In other
¹We are unable to distinguish in this preliminary contribution what there is new in this content, and what can be found in such other authors as Moebius and
Striimpell, who present similar views on hysteria. The greatest similarity to our theoretic and therapeutic accomplishments we accidentally found in some published
observations of Benedict, which we shall discuss later on.
²The German abreagiren has no exact English equivalent. It will therefore, be rendered throughout the text by ab-react; the literal meaning is to react away or to react
off. It is the act of giving vent in speech and action to repressed experiences, and thereby disburdening one's self of their unconscious influences. It has different
shades of meaning, from defence re action to emotional catharsis, which can be discerned from the context.—Tr.



cases, talking in the form of deploring and giving vent to the torments of the secret (confession) is in itself an adequate reflex. If
such.re action does not result through deeds, words, or in the most elementary case through weeping, the memory of the
occurrence retains above all an affective accentuation.

The ab-reaction, however, is not the only form of discharge at the disposal of the normal psychic mechanism of the healthy person
who has experienced a psychic trauma. The memory of the trauma, even where it has not been ab-reacted, enters into the great
complex of the associations. It joins the other experiences which are perhaps antagonistic to it, and thus undergoes correction
through other ideas. For example, after an accident the memory of the danger and (dimmed) repetition of the fright is accompanied
by the recollection of the further course, the rescue and the consciousness of present security. The memory of a grievance may be
corrected by a rectification of the state of affairs by reflecting upon one's own dignity and similar things. A normal person is in this
way capable of dissipating the accompanying affect by means of association.
In addition, there appears that general blurring of impressions, that fading of memories which we call forgetting, and which above all
wears out the affective ideas no longer active. It follows from our observations that those memories which become the causes of
hysterical phenomena have been preserved for a long time with wonderful freshness and with their perfect emotional tone. As a
further striking and a later realizable fact, we have to mention that the patients do not perhaps have the same control of these as of
their other memories of life. On the contrary, these experiences are either completely lacking from the memory of the patients in
their usual psychic state, or at most exist in greatly abridged form. Only after the patients are questioned in the hypnotic state do
these memories appear with the undiminished vividness of fresh occurrences.

Thus, one of our patients in a hypnotic state reproduced with hallucinatory vividness throughout half a year everything that excited
her during an acute hysteria on the same days of the preceding year. Her mother's diary, which was unknown to the patient, proved
the faultless accuracy of the reproductions. Partly in hypnosis and partly in spontaneous attacks, another patient lived through with
hallucinatory distinctness all experiences of a hysterical psychosis which she went through ten years before, and for the greatest part
of which she had been amnesic until its reappearance. Also, some individual memories of aetiological importance showed surprising
integrity and sentient force of fifteen to twenty-five years' duration, and on their return exerted the full affective force of new
experiences.

The reason for this we can seek only in the fact that these memories occupy an exceptional position in all the above-mentioned
relations, as far as vividness is concerned. For it was really shown that these memories correspond to traumas which were not
sufficiently ab-reacted, and on closer investigation of the reasons for this hindrance, we can find at least two series of determinants
through which the reaction to the trauma was omitted.

To the first group we add those cases in which the patient had not reacted to psychic traumas because the nature of the trauma
precluded a reaction, or because social relations made the reaction impossible, or because it concerned things which the patient
wished to forget and which he, therefore, intentionally inhibited and repressed from his conscious memory. It is just such painful
things which are found in the hypnotic state as the basis of hysterical phenomena (hysterical delirium of saints, nuns, abstinent
women, and well-bred children).

The second series of determinants is not conditioned by the content of the memories, but by the psychic states with which the
corresponding experiences in the patient have united. As a cause of hysterical symptoms, one finds in hypnosis even ideas which are
insignificant in themselves, but which owe their preservation to the fact that they originated during a severe paralyzing affect like
fright, or directly in abnormal psychic conditions, as in the semi-hypnotic twilight states of day-dreaming in auto-hypnosis, and
similar states. Here, it is the nature of these conditions which makes a reaction to the incident impossible.

To be sure, both determinants can naturally unite, and, as a matter of fact, they often do. This is the case when a trauma, in itself
effectual, occurs in a state of a severely paralyzing affect, or from a transformed consciousness. But it may also happen that the
psychic trauma evokes in many persons one of these abnormal states which in turn makes the reaction impossible.

What is common to both groups of determinants is the fact that those psychic traumas which are not adjusted by reaction are also
pre vented from adjustment by associative elaboration. In the first group it is the resolution of the patient which strives to forget the
painful experiences and in this way, if possible, to exclude them from association; in the second group the associative elaboration
does not succeed because between the normal and pathological state of consciousness, in which these ideas originated, there is no
productive associative relationship. We shall soon have occasion to discuss more fully these relationships.

Hence, we can say that the reason why the pathogenically formed ideas retain their fresh ness and affective force is because they are
not subject to the normal fading through ab-reaction and through reproduction in states of uninhibited association.

                                                                    III

When we discussed the conditions which, according to our experience, are decisive in the development of hysterical phenomena
from psychic traumas, we were forced to speak of abnormal states of consciousness in which such pathogenic ideas originate, and
we had to emphasize the fact that the recollection of the effectual psychic trauma is not to be found in the normal memory of the
patient, but in the hypnotized memory. The more we occupied ourselves-with these phenomena the more certain became our
convictions that the splitting of consciousness, so striking in the familiar classical cases of double consciousness, exists rudimentarily
in every hysteria, and that the tendency to this dissociation, and with it the appearance of abnormal states of consciousness which
we comprise as hypnoid, is the basic phenomenon of this neurosis. In this view we agree with Binet and Janet, though we had no
experience with their remarkable findings in anaesthetic patients.
Hence, to the often-cited axiom, "Hypnosis is artificial hysteria," we should like to add another: "The existence of hypnoid states is
the basis and determination of hysteria." These hypnoid states agree in all their diversities among themselves and with hypnosis in
the one point, namely that the ideas arising in them are very intensive, but are excluded from as sociative relations with the rest of
the content of consciousness. These hypnoid states are associable among themselves, and their ideation may thus attain various high
degrees of psychic organization. In other respects the nature of these states and the degree of their exclusiveness differ from the rest
of the conscious proc esses, as do the various states of hypnosis, which range from light somnolence to somnambulism, and from
perfect memory to absolute amnesia.

If such hypnoid states have already existed before the manifest disease, they prepare the soil upon which the affect establishes the
pathogenic memories with their resulting somatic manifestations. This behavior corresponds to hysteria, based on a predisposition.
But our observations show that a severe trauma (like a traumatic neurosis) or a severe suppression (perhaps of a sexual affect) may
bring about a splitting of ideas even in persons without pre dispositions. This represents the mechanism of the psychically acquired
hysteria. Between these two extremes we have a series in which the facility of dissociation in a particular individual and the
magnitude of the affective trauma vary inversely.

We are unable to say anything new as to the determination of the predisposed hypnoid states. We presume that they often develop
from "reveries," which are so frequent even in normal persons, for which, for example, feminine handwork offers so much
opportunity. The questions why "the pathological associations" formed in such states are so firm, and why they exert a stronger
influence on the somatic processes than other ideas, are ail indissolubly linked with the problem of the effectiveness of hypnotic
suggestions in general. Our experiences in this matter do not show us any thing new; but they rather throw light on the contradiction
between the statement, "Hysteria is a psychosis," and the fact that among hysterics one may meet persons of the clearest intellects,
the strongest wills, greatest principles, and of the subtlest minds. In these cases, such characteristics hold true only in the per son's
waking thought; in his hypnotic state he is alienated just as we all are in our dreams. Yet, whereas our dream psychoses do not
influence our waking state, the products of hypnotic states are projected into the waking state as hysterical phenomena.

                                                                   IV

Almost the same assertions that we have advanced about hysterical symptoms we may also repeat concerning hysterical attacks. As
is known, we have Charcot's schematic description of the major hysterical attack, which in complete form shows four phases: (1) The
epileptoid, (2) the major movements, (3) the attitudes passionelles (hallucinatory phase), and (4) the concluding delirium. By
shortening or prolonging the attack, and by isolating the individual phases, Charcot obtained all those forms of the hysterical attack,
which are really observed more frequently than the complete grande attaque.

Our tentative explanation refers to the third phase, the attitudes passionelles. Wherever it is prominent, it contains the hallucinatory
reproduction of a memory which was significant for the hysterical onset. It is the memory of a major trauma, the χατʹ εξοχήν of the
so-called traumatic hysteria, or of a series of partial traumas belonging together as they are found at the basis of the ordinary
hysteria. Or, finally the attack may bring back those occurrences which, because of their encounter with a factor of a special
predisposition, have become raised to traumas.

But there are also other attacks which ostensibly consist only of motor phenomena and lack the passionelle phase. If it is possible
during such an attack of general twitching, cataleptic rigidity, or an attaque de sommeil, to put one's self en rapport with the patient,
or still better, if one succeeds in evoking the attack in a hypnotic state, it will then be found that here, too, the root of it is the
memory of a psychic trauma, or of a series of traumas which make themselves otherwise prominent in an hallucinatory phase. Thus,
a little girl had suffered for years from attacks of general convulsions, which could be, and were, taken for epilepsy. For differential
diagnostic reasons she was hypnotized and she immediately lapsed into one of her attacks. On being asked what she saw, she said,
"The dog, the dog is coming," and it actually turned out that the first attack of this kind appeared after she was pursued by a mad
dog. The success of the therapy then verified our diagnostic decision.

An official, who became hysterical as a result of ill treatment by his employer, suffered from attacks during which he fell to the floor
raging furiously without uttering a word or displaying any hallucinations. The attack was provoked in a state of hypnosis, and he then
stated that he lived through the scene during which his employer insulted him in the street and struck him with his cane. A few days
later he came to me complaining that he had the same attack, but it was shown in the hypnosis this time that he went through the
scene which was really connected with the onset of his disease, it was the scene in the court room, when he was unable to get
satisfaction for the ill treatment which he received, etc.

The memories which appear in hysterical at tacks, or which can be awakened in them, correspond in all other respects to the causes
which we have found as the basis of continuous hysterical symptoms. Like these, they refer to psychic traumas which were prevented
from adjustment through ab-reaction or through associative elaboration; like these, they were absent entirely or in their essential
components in the total memory of normal consciousness, and showed themselves as parts of the ideation content of hypnoid states
of consciousness with restricted associations. Finally they were also amenable to the therapeutic test. Our observations have often
taught us that a memory which has hitherto provoked attacks becomes incapable of it when it is brought to reaction and associative
correction in a hypnotic state.

The motor phenomena of the hysterical attack can in part be interpreted as the memory of general forms of reaction of the
accompanying affect (like the fidgeting of the whole body to which the infant already resorts), in part as a direct motor expression of
this memory, and in other parts they, like the hysterical stigmata in the permanent symptoms, elude this explanation.

A special estimation of the hysterical attack is obtained if one also takes into account the fact that in hysteria there are groups of
ideas which originated in hypnoid states, which are excluded from associative activity with the rest, but are associable among
themselves and thus represent a more or less highly organized rudi-mentary second consciousness, a condition seconde. A persistent
hysterical symptom, therefore, corresponds to an impingement of this second state upon a bodily innervation otherwise controlled
by the normal consciousness. But an hysterical attack gives evidence of a higher organization of this second state and, if of recent
origin, signifies a moment in which this hypnoid consciousness has gained control of the whole existence, that is, we have an acute
hysteria; but if it is a recurrent attack containing a memory, we simply have a repetition of the same. Charcot has already given
utterance to the thought that the hysterical attack must be the rudiment of a condition seconde. During the attack, the control of the
whole bodily innervation passes over to the hypnoid consciousness. As familiar experiences show, the normal consciousness is not
always entirely repressed by it; it may even perceive the motor phenomenon of the attack while the psychic processes of the same
escape all knowledge of it.

The typical course of a grave hysteria, as is well known, is as follows: At first an ideation is formed in the hypnoid state, which, after
sufficient growth, gains control in a period of acute hysteria of the bodily innervation and the existence of the patient, and creates
permanent symptoms and attacks, and with the exception of some residuum then ends in recovery. If the normal personality can
regain the upper hand, all that has survived the hypnoid ideation content then returns in hysterical attacks, and now and then it
brings the person back into similar states which are again amenable to influences and eligible for traumas. Frequently a sort of
equilibrium is then established between the psychic groups which are united in the same person; attack and normal life go hand in
hand without influencing each other. The attack then comes spontaneously just as memories are wont to come, but just like
memories it can also be provoked by the laws of association. The provocation of the attack results either through stimulating a
hysterogenic zone or through a new experience which by similarity recalls the pathogenic experience. We hope to be able to show
that there is no essential difference between the apparently two diverse determinants, and that in both cases a hyperaesthetic
memory is touched. In other cases, this equilibrium shows a marked lability; the attack appears as a manifestation of the hypnoidal
remnant of consciousness, as often as the normal person becomes exhausted and functionally incapacitated. We cannot disregard
the fact that in such cases the attack becomes stripped of its original significance and may return as a contentless motor reaction.

It remains a task for future investigation to discover what conditions are decisive in determining whether an hysterical individuality
should manifest itself in attacks, in persistent symptoms, or in a mingling of both.

                                                                    V

We can now understand in what manner the psycho-therapeutic method propounded by us exerts its curative effect. It abrogates the
efficacy of the original non-ab-reacted ideas by affording an outlet to their strangulated affects through speech. It brings them to
associative correction by drawing them into normal consciousness (in mild hypnosis) or by eliminating them through medical
suggestion in the same way as in somnambulism with amnesia.

We maintain that the therapeutic gain obtained by applying this process is quite significant. To be sure, we do not cure the hysteria
insofar as it represents a predisposition, for we really do not block the way for the recurrence of hypnoid states. Nor is our procedure
capable of preventing the replacement of the laboriously abrogated phenomena by new ones. But once this acute stage has run its
course and its remnants continue as permanent hysterical symptoms and attacks, our radical method can frequently remove them
forever, and herein it seems to surpass the efficacy of direct suggestion, as practised at present by psycho-therapists.

If, by disclosing the psychic mechanisms of hysterical phenomena, we have taken a step forward on the path so successfully started
by Charcot with his explanation and experimental imitation of hystero-traumatic paralysis, we are well aware that in so doing we
have only advanced our knowledge in the mechanisms of hysterical symptoms and not in the subjective causes of hysteria. We have
grazed only the aetiology of hysteria, and can only throw light on the causes of the acquired forms, i.e., on the significance of the
accidental factors of the neurosis.
                                                                    CHAPTER 2

                                                            Case History of Miss Lucie R¹

Towards the end of 1892, a friendly colleague recommended to me a young lady whom he had been treating for chronic recurrent
purulent rhinitis. It was later found that the obstinacy of her trouble was caused by a caries of the ethmoid. She finally complained of
new symptoms which this experienced physician could no longer refer to local affections. She had lost all perception of smell and was
almost constantly bothered by one or two subjective sensations of smell. This she found very irksome. In addition to this she was
depressed in spirits, weak, and complained of a heavy head, loss of appetite, and an incapacity for work.

This young lady visited me from time to time during my office hours—she was a governess in the family of a factory superintendent
living in the suburbs of Vienna. She was an English lady of rather delicate constitution, anemic, and, with the exception of her nasal
trouble, was in good health. Her first statements concurred with those of her physician.
¹Breuer u. Freud, Studien uber Hysterie (1895), Case III.

She suffered from mild depression and lassitude, and was tormented by subjective sensations of smell. Of hysterical signs, she
showed a quite distinct general analgesia without tac tile impairment, the fields of vision showed no narrowing on coarse testing
with the hand. The nasal mucous membrane was totally analgesic and reflexless. Tactile sensation was absent, and the perception of
this sense organ was abolished for specific as well as for other stimuli, such as ammonia or acetic acid. The purulent nasal catarrh
was just then in a period of improvement.

On first attempting to understand this case we felt that subjective sensations of smell must represent recurrent hallucinations
interpreting persistent hysterical symptoms, that the mild depression was perhaps the affect belonging to the trauma, and that there
must have been an episode during which the present subjective sensations were objective. This episode must have been the trauma,
the symbols of which recurred in her memory as sensations of smell. Perhaps it would have been more correct to consider the
recurring hallucinations of smell with the accompanying depression as equivalents of hysterical attacks. For the nature of recurrent
hallucinations really makes them unsuitable for the role of chronic symptoms, which was hardly the question in this rudimentary
case. But it was absolutely necessary that the subjective sensations of smell should show a specialization that could correspond to a
very definite and real objective origin.

This expectation was soon fulfilled, for on being asked what odour troubled her most she stated that it was an odour of burned
pastry. I could then assume that the odour of burned pastry really occurred in the traumatic event. It is quite unusual to select
sensations of smell as memory symbols of traumas, but it is quite obvious why these were here selected. She was afflicted with
purulent-rhinitis, hence the nose and its perceptions were in the foreground of her attention. All I knew about the life of the patient
was that she took care of two children whose mother died a few years ago from a grave and acute disease.

As a starting point of the analysis, I decided to use the "odour of burned pastry". I will now relate the history of this analysis. It could
have occurred under more favourable conditions, but, as a matter of fact, what should have taken place in one session was extended
over a number of them. She could only visit me during my office hours, during which I could devote to her but little of my time. One
single conversation had to be extended for over a week as her duties did not permit her to come to me often from such a distance,
so that the conversation was frequently broken off and resumed at the next session.

On attempting to hypnotize Miss Lucie R, she did not lapse into the somnambulic state. I, therefore, was obliged to forego
somnambulism, and the analysis was made while she was in a state which did not perhaps differ much from the normal.

I feel obliged to express myself more fully about the point of the technique of my procedure. While visiting the Nancy clinics in 1889,
I heard Dr. Liebault, the old master of hypnotism, say: "Yes, if we had the means to put everybody into the somnambulic state,
hypnotism would then be the most powerful therapeutic agent." In Bernheim's clinic it almost seemed that such an art really existed,
and that it could be learned from Bernheim. But as soon as I tried to practise it on my own patients, I noticed that at least my powers
were quite limited in this respect. Whenever a patient did not sink into the somnambulic state after one or two attempts, I possessed
no means to force him into it. However, the percentage of somnambulists in my experience was far below that claimed by Bernheim.

Thus, I had the choice either to refrain from using the cathartic method in most of the cases suitable for it, or to venture the attempt
without somnambulism by using hypnotic influence in light or even doubtful cases. It made no difference of what degree (following
the accepted scales of hypnotism) the hypnotism was, which did not correspond to somnambulism, for every line of suggestibility is
independent of the other, and nothing prejudices the evocation of catalepsy, automatic movements, and similar phenomena, for the
purpose of facilitating the awakening of forgotten recollections. I soon relinquished the habit of deciding the degree of hypnotism, as
in a great number of cases it incited the patient's resistance and clouded the confidence which I needed for the more important
psychic work. Moreover, in mild grades of hypnotism I soon tired of hearing, after the assurance and command, "You will sleep, sleep
now!" such protests as, "But, Doctor, I am not sleeping." I was forced to bring in the very delicate. distinction, saying, "I do not mean
the usual sleep, I mean the hypnotic—you see, you are hypnotized, you cannot open your eyes"; or, "I really don't want you to
sleep." I am convinced that many of my colleagues who use psycho-therapy know how to get out of such difficulties more skilfully
than I, they can, therefore, act differently. I, however, believe that if through the use of a word one can so frequently become
embarrassed, it is better to avoid the word and the embarrassment. Wherever the first attempt did not produce either
somnambulism or a degree of hypnotism with pronounced bodily changes, I dropped the hypnosis and demanded only
"concentration," I ordered the patient to lie on his back and close his eyes as a means of attaining this "concentration." With little
effort I obtained as profound a degree of hypnotism as was possible.

But as I gave up the use of somnambulism; I perhaps deprived myself of that prerequisite without which the cathartic method
seemed inapplicable. For the latter is based on the assumption that in the altered state of consciousness the patients have at their
disposal recollections and associations which do not apparently exist in their normal conscious state, and that wherever there is no
somnambulic broadening of consciousness, it must also be impossible to bring about those causal relations which the patient gives
the doctor as something unknown to him, that is, those pathogenic recollections "which are lacking from the memory of the patients
in their usual psychic states or only exist in a most condensed state" (Preliminary Communication).

My memory helped me out of this embarrassment. I myself saw Bernheim demonstrate that the recollections of somnambulism are
only manifestly forgotten in the waking state and can be readily reproduced by some urging, accompanied by hand pressure, which is
supposed to mark another conscious state. He, for instance, imparted to a somnambulist the negative hallucination that he was no
longer present, and then attempted to make himself noticeable to her by the most manifold and in considerate attacks, but was
unsuccessful] After the patient was awakened, he asked her what he did to her during the time that she thought he was not there.
She replied, very much astonished, that she knew nothing, but he did not stop there, he insisted that she would recall everything,
and placed his hand on her forehead so that she should recall things, and behold, she finally related all that she did not apparently
perceive in the somnambulic state, and about which she ostensibly knew nothing in the waking state.

This astonishing and instructive experiment was my model. I decided to proceed on the supposition that my patients knew
everything that was of any pathogenic significance, and that all that was necessary was to force them to impart it. Whenever I
reached a point where to my questions, "Since when have you had this symptom?" or "Where does it come from?" I received the
answer, "I really don't know this," I proceeded as follows: I placed my hand on the patient's forehead or took her head between my
hands and said, "Through the pressure of my hands it will come into your mind; the moment that I stop the pressure you will see
something before you, or something will flash through your mind which you must note; it is that which we are seeking. Well, what
have you seen or what came into your mind?"

On applying this method for the first time (it was not in the case of Miss Lucie R) I was surprised to find just what I wanted, and I may
say that it has since hardly ever failed me; it always showed me how to proceed in my investigations and enabled me to do all such
analyses without somnambulism. Gradually, I became so bold that when a patient would answer "I see nothing," or "Nothing came
into my mind," I insisted that it was impossible, that he probably had the right thought, but that he did not believe it and repudiated
it, that I would repeat the procedure as often as he wished, and that every time he would see the same thing. Indeed, I was always
right; the patients had not as yet learned to let their criticism rest. They repudiated the emerging recollection or fancy because they
considered it as a useless, intruding disturbance, but after they imparted it, it was always shown that it was the right one.
Occasionally, after forcing a communication by pressing the head three or four times, I got such an answer as "Yes, I was aware of it
the first time, but did not wish to say it," or, "I hoped that it would not be this."

By this method it was far more laborious to broaden the alleged narrowed consciousness than by investigating in the somnambulic
state, but it made me independent of somnambulism and afforded me an insight into the motives which are frequently decisive for
the "forgetting" of recollections. I am in a position to assert that this forgetting is often intentional and desired, but it is always only
manifestly successful.

It appeared to me even more remarkable that apparently long-forgotten numbers and dates can be reproduced by a similar process,
thus demonstrating an unexpected faithful ness of memory.

The insignificant choice which one has in searching for numbers and dates especially allows us to take to our aid the familiar axiom of
the theory of aphasia, namely, that recognition is a lesser accomplishment of memory than spontaneous recollection.

Hence, to a patient who is unable to recall in what year, month, or day a certain event took place, enumerate the years during which
it might have occurred as well as the names of the twelve months and the thirty-one days of the month, and assure him that at the
right number or name his eyes will open themselves or that he will feel which number is the correct one. In most cases the patients
really decide on a definite date and frequently enough (as in the case of Mrs. Cecilia N) it could be ascertained from existing notes of
that time that the date was correctly recognized. At other times and in different patients it was shown from the connection of the
recollected facts that the dates thus found were incontestable. A patient, for instance, after a date was found by enumerating for her
the dates, remarked, "This is my father's birthday," and added, "Of course, I expected this episode (about which we spoke) because it
was my father's birthday."

I can only lightly touch upon this theme. The conclusion which I wish to draw from all these experiences is that the pathogenic
important experiences with all their concomitant circumstances are faithfully retained in memory, even where they seem forgotten,
as when the patient seems unable to recall them.¹
¹As an example of the technique mentioned above, that is, of investigating in a non-somnambulic state or where consciousness is not broadened, I will relate a case
which I analyzed recently. I treated a woman of thirty-eight who suffered from an anxiety neurosis (agoraphobia, fear of death, etc.). Like many patients of that type,
she had a disinclination to admit that she acquired this disease in her married state and was quite desirous of referring it back to her early youth. She informed me
that at the age of seventeen when she was in the street of her small city she had the first attack of vertigo, anxiety, and faintness, and that these attacks recurred at
times up to a few years ago when they were replaced by her present disease. I thought that the first attacks of vertigo, in which the anxiety was only blurred, were
hysterical, and decided to analyze the same. All she knew was that she had the first attack when she went out to make purchases in the main street of her city.—
"What purchases did you wish to make?"—"Various things, I believe it was for a ball to which I was invited."—"When was the ball to take place?"—"I believe two days
later."-— "Something must have happened a few days before this which excited you and which made an impression on you."—"But I don't know, it is now twenty-one
years."—"That does not matter, you will recall it. I will exert some pressure on your head and when I stop it, you will either think of or see something which I want you
to tell me." I went through this procedure, but she remained quiet.—"Well, has nothing come into your mind?"—"I thought of something, but that can have no
connection with it."—"Just say it."—"I thought of a young girl who is dead, but she died when I was eighteen, that is, a year later."—"Let us adhere to this. What was
the matter with your friend?"—"Her death affected me very much, because I was very friendly with her. A few weeks before another young girl died, which attracted a
great deal of attention in our city, but then I was only seventeen years old."—"You see, I told you that the thought obtained under the pressure of the hands can be
relied upon. Well, now, can you recall the thought that you had when you became dizzy in the street?"—"There was no thought, it was vertigo."—"That is quite
impossible, such conditions are never without accompanying ideas. I will press your head again and you will think of it. Well, what came to your mind?"—"I thought,
'Now I am the third.' "—"What do you mean?"—"When I became dizzy, I must have thought, 'Now I will die like the other two.' "—"That was then the idea, during the
attack you thought of your friend, her death must have made a great impression on you." —"Yes, indeed, I recall now that I felt dreadful when I heard of her death, to
think that I should go to a ball while she lay dead, but I anticipated so much pleasure at the ball and was so occupied with the invitation that I did not wish to think of
this sad event." (Notice here the intentional repression from consciousness which caused the reminiscences of her friend to become pathogenic.)
The attack was now in a measure explained, but I still needed the occasional factor which just then provoked this recollection, and accidentally I formed a happy
supposition about it.—"Can you recall through which street you passed at that time?"—"Surely, the main street with its old houses, I can see it now."— "And where
did your friend live?"—"In the same street. I had just passed her house and was two houses farther when I was seized with the attack."—"Then it was the house which
you passed that recalled your dead friend, and the contrast which you then did not wish to think about, that took possession of you."
Still, I was not satisfied; perhaps there was something else which provoked or strengthened the hysterical disposition in a hitherto normal girl. My suppositions were
directed to the menstrual indisposition as an appropriate factor, and I asked, "Do you know when during that month you had your menses?"— She became indignant:
"Do you expect me to know that? I only know that I had them very rarely and irregularly. When I was seventeen, I only had them once."—"Well, let us enumerate the
days, months, etc., so as to find when it occurred."—She decided with certainty on a month and wavered between two days preceding a date which accompanied a
fixed holiday.—"Does that in any way correspond with the time of the ball?"—She answered quietly: "The ball was on this holiday. And now I recall that the only
menses which I had had during the year occurred just when I had to go to the ball. It was the first invitation to a ball that I had received."
The combination of the events can now be readily constructed and the mechanism of this hysterical attack readily viewed. To be sure, the result was gained after
painstaking labour. It necessitated on my side full confidence in the technique and in the individual leading ideas, in order to reawaken such details of forgotten
experiences after twenty-one years in a skeptical and really awakened patient. But then everything coincided.



54 FREUD: Hysteria, 43b-49b

The traumatic factor in the history of our patient corresponds to the scene created by her master on account of the kissing of the
children. For the time being this scene remained without any palpable effects, perhaps it initiated the depression and sensitiveness,
but I leave this open; the hysterical symptoms, however, commenced later in moments which can be designated as auxiliary, and
which may be characterized by the fact that in them there was a simultaneous inter-fusion of both separated groups just as in the
broadened somnambulic consciousness. The first of these factors in which the conversion took place in Miss Lucie R was the scene at
the table when the chief accountant attempted to kiss the children. The traumatic memory helped along, and she acted as though
she had not entirely banished her attachment for her master. In other cases we find that these different factors coalesce and the
conversion occurs directly under the influence of the trauma.

The second auxiliary factor repeated almost precisely the mechanism of the first. A strong impression transitorily re-established the
unity of consciousness, and the conversion took the same route that was opened to it the first time. It is interesting to note that the
symptom which occurred second concealed the first, so that the latter could not be distinctly perceived until the former was
eliminated. The reversal of the succession of events, to which also the analysis had to be adapted, seemed quite remarkable. In a
whole series of cases I found that the symptoms which came later covered the first, and only the last thing in the analysis contained
the key to the whole.
The therapy here consisted in forcing the union of the dissociated psychic groups with the ego consciousness. It is remarkable that
the success did not run parallel with the accomplished work, the cure resulted suddenly only after the last part was accomplished.

                                                                      CHAPTER 3

                                                          Case History of Miss Elisabeth von R¹

In the fall of 1892 I was requested by a friendly colleague to examine a young lady who had been suffering from pains in her legs for
over two years, so that she walked badly. He also add ed to his request that he had diagnosed the case as hysteria, though none of
the usual symptoms of the neurosis could be found. He stated that he knew very little of the family, but that
¹Breuer u. Freud, Studien uber Hysterie (1895), Case V.

the last few years had brought them much misfortune and little pleasure. First the patient's father died, then the mother underwent
a serious operation on her eyes, and soon thereafter a married sister succumbed to a chronic cardiac affection following childbirth.
Our patient had taken an active part in all the afflictions, especially in the nursing of the sick.

I made no further progress in the case after I had seen the twenty-four-year-old patient for the first time. She seemed intelligent and
psychically normal, and bore her affliction with a cheerful mien, thus vividly recalling the belle indifference of hysterics. She walked
with the upper part of her body bent forward, but without any support; her walk did not correspond to any known pathological gait,
and it was in no way strikingly bad. She complained only of severe pains and of early fatigue in walking as well as standing, so that
after a brief period she had to seek rest in which the pains diminished, but by no means disappeared. The pain was of an indefinite
nature—one could assume it to be a painful fatigue. The seat of the pain was quite extensive, but indefinitely circumscribed on the
superficial surface of the right thigh. It was from this area that the pains radiated and were of the greatest intensity. Here, too, the
skin and muscles were especially sensitive to pressure and pinching, while needle pricks were rather indifferently perceived. The
same hyperalgesia of the skin and muscles was demonstrable not only in this area, but over almost the entire surface of both legs.
The muscles were perhaps more painful than the skin, but both kinds of pains were unmistakably most pronounced over the thighs.
The motor power of the legs was not diminished, the reflexes were of average intensity, and, as all other symptoms were lacking,
there was no basis for the assumption of a serious organic affection. The disease developed gradually during two years and changed
considerably in its intensity.

I did not find it easy to determine the diagnosis, but for two reasons I concluded to agree with my colleague. First, because it was
rather strange that such a highly intelligent patient should not be able to give anything definite about the character of her pains. A
patient suffering from an organic pain, if it is not accompanied by any nervousness, will be able to describe it definitely and calmly; it
may perhaps be lancinating, appear at certain intervals, and extend from this to that location, or in his opinion it may be evoked by
this or that influence. The neurasthenic¹ in describing his pain gives the impression as being occupied with some difficult mental
problem, something far beyond his powers. His features are tense and distorted as though under the domination of a painful affect,
his voice becomes shriller, he struggles for expression, he rejects all designations that the physician makes for his pains, even though
they are undoubtedly afterwards found to be correct. He is ostensibly of the opinion that language is too poor to give expression to
his feelings. These sensations are something unique, they never existed before, so that they cannot be exhaustively described. It is
for this reason that he never tires of constantly adding new details, and, when he has to stop, he is distinctly controlled by the
impression that he was unsuccessful in making himself understood to the physician. All this is due to the fact that his pains absorb his
whole attention. In the case of Miss von R, we had just the opposite behaviour, and we had to conclude from this that she attributed
sufficient significance to the pain, but that her attention was concentrated on something else of which the pains were only the
accompanying phenomena, perhaps on thoughts and sensations which were connected with pain.

A still greater determination for the conception of the pain must, however, be found in a second factor. If we irritate a painful area in
a patient suffering from an organic disease or neurasthenia, his physiognomy will show a definite expression of discomfort or of
physical pain, the patient winces, refuses to be examined, and assumes a defensive attitude. But if anyone pinched or pressed Miss
von R's hyperalgesic skin or muscles of her legs, her face assumed a peculiar expression approaching nearer pleasure than pain, she
cried out and— I had to think of a perhaps pleasurable tickling—her face reddened, she threw her head backward, closed her eyes,
and her body bent backward; all this was not very distinct, but sufficiently marked so that it could only agree with the conception
that her affliction was a hysteria and that the irritation touched a hysterogenic zone.

Her mien was not adequate to the pain, which the pinching of the muscles and skin were supposed to excite. It probably harmonized
better with the contents of the thoughts which were behind the pain and which were evoked in the patient through a stimulation of
those parts of
¹A hypochondriac afflicted with anxiety neurosis.-Tr.
the body associated with them. I have repeatedly observed similar significant expression from stimulation of hyperalgesic zones in
unmistakable cases of hysteria. The other gestures evidently corresponded to the slightest suggestion of an hysterical attack.

We could not at that time find any explanation for the unusual localization of the hysterogenic zone. That the hyperalgesia chiefly
concerned the muscles, gave material for reflection. The most frequent affliction which could produce diffuse and local pressure
sensitiveness of the muscles is rheumatic infiltration, or common chronic muscular rheumatism; of its aptitude to mask nervous
ailments I have spoken. The consistency of the painful muscles in Miss von R did not contradict this assumption, as there were many
hard cords in the muscle masses, which seemed to be especially sensitive. There was probably also an organic change in the muscles,
in the assumed sense, upon which the neurosis leaned, and the significance of which was markedly exaggerated by the neurosis.

The therapeutic procedure was, therefore, based on the assumption of a mixed affection. We recommended systematic massage and
faradization of the sensitive muscles, regardless of the pain it produced, and in order to remain in contact with the patient, I treated
her legs by means of strong Franklin sparks. To her question whether she should force herself to walk, we answered decidedly in the
affirmative.

We thus attained a slight improvement. She particularly liked the painful shocks of the "in fluence machine," and the stronger they
were, the more they seemed to remove her pains. My colleague, meanwhile, prepared the soil for the psychic treatment, and, when
after four weeks of this sham treatment I proposed it and explained to the patient the procedures and its effects, I found a ready
understanding and only a slight resistance.

The work which I then began turned out to be the most arduous undertaking that ever fell to my lot, and the difficulty of giving an
account of this work ranks well with the obstacles that had to be overcome. For a long time, too, I did not understand the connection
between the history of the disease and the affliction, which should really have been caused and determined by this series of events.

When one undertakes a cathartic treatment, he at first asks himself whether the patient understands the origin and cause of her
suffering. If that is so, one does not need any special technique to cause her to reproduce the history of her ailment. The interest
shown in her, the understanding which we foreshadow, the hope of recovery extended to her, all these induce the patient to give up
her secrets. In the case of Miss Elisabeth, it seemed probably right from the very beginning that she was conscious of the reasons for
her suffering, that she had only a secret but no foreign body in consciousness. On looking at her one had to think of the poet's words:
"That mask indicates a hidden meaning."¹

At first I could, therefore, dispense with hypnosis, reserving it, however, for future use should conditions arise in the course of the
confession for which explanation the memory would not suffice. Thus, in this first complete analysis of an hysteria which I had under
taken I attained a process of treatment which I later raised to a method and intentionally used as a process of clearing stratum by
stratum the pathogenic psychic material, which we were pleased to compare with the technique of excavating a buried city. At first I
let the patient relate what was known to her, paying careful attention wherever a connection remained enigmatic, or where a link in
the chain of causation seemed to be lacking. Later, I penetrated into the deeper strata of memory by using for those locations
hypnotic investigations or a similar technique. The presupposition of the whole work was naturally based on the expectation that a
perfect and sufficient determination could be demonstrated. The methods of the deeper investigation will soon be discussed.

The history which Miss Elisabeth gave was quite dull and was woven of manifold painful experiences. During this recital she was not
in a hypnotic state; I merely asked her to lie down and keep her eyes closed. I, however, made no objection if from time to time she
opened her eyes, changed her position, or sat up. Whenever she entered more deeply into a part of her history, she seemed to lapse
spontaneously into a condition resembling a hypnotic state. She then remained motionless and kept her eyes firmly closed.

I shall now reproduce the results of the most superficial stratum of her memory. As the youngest of three daughters she spent her
youth with her parents, to whom she was devotedly attached, on their estate in Hungary. Her mother's health was frequently
disturbed by an affliction of the eyes, as well as by a nervous ail
¹It will be shown that I was, nevertheless, mistaken.

ment. It thus happened that she became especially and devotedly attached to her jovial and broadminded father, who was wont to
say that his daughter took the place of both a son and friend with whom he could exchange thoughts. As much as the girl gained in
mental stimulation in consequence of this intercourse, it did not escape the father that her psychic constitution deviated from that
ideal which one so much desires to see in a girl. Jocosely he called her "pert and disputatious." He warned her against being too
confident in her judgments, against her tendencies to tell the truth regardless of everybody, and expressed his opinion that she
would find it difficult to get a husband. As a matter of fact, she was very discontented with her girlhood; she was filled with
ambitious plans, she wished to study or to obtain a musical education, and revolted at the thought of being forced to give up her
ambitions and sacrifice her freedom of judgment for the sake of marriage. Meanwhile, she was proud of her father, of the regard and
social position of her family, and jealously guarded everything connected with these matters. The indifference with which she treated
her mother and older sisters, as will be shown, was considered by her parents to be due to the blunter side of her character.

The age of the girls impelled the family to move into the metropolis, where for a time Elisabeth enjoyed a richer and gayer social life.
But then came the calamity which destroyed the happiness of the home. The father either concealed or overlooked a chronic cardiac
affection, and one day he was brought home in an unconscious state after the first attack of oedema of the lungs. This was followed
by an illness of one and a half years, during which Elisabeth took the most prominent part in nursing him. She slept in her father's
room, awoke at night at his call, watched over him faithfully during the day, and forced herself to appear cheerful while he went
through a hopeless condition with amiable resignation. The beginning of her affection must have been connected with this period of
her nursing, for she could recall that during the last half year of this care she had to remain in bed on one occasion for a day and a
half on account of severe pain in her right leg. She maintained, however, that these pains soon passed away and excited neither
worry nor attention. As a matter of fact, it was not before two years after the death of her father that she began to feel sick and
unable to walk on account of pain.

The void which her father left in the life of this family consisting of four women, the social solitude, the cessation of so many
relations which promised stimulation and pleasure, the increased infirmity of the mother, all these be clouded the patient's
emotional attitude, but simultaneously aroused a warm desire that the family might soon find a substitute for the lost happiness, and
impelled her to concentrate her entire devotion and care on the surviving moth er. At the end of the year of mourning, the eldest
sister married a talented and ambitious man of notable position, who seemed to have been destined for a great future by virtue of
his mentality, but who, however, soon developed a morbid sensitiveness and egotistic perseveration of moods, and dared to show his
disregard for the old lady in the family circle. That was more than Elisabeth could endure. She felt it her duty to take up the cudgels
against her brother-in-law whenever he gave occasion for it, whereas the other women took lightly the outburst of his excited
temperament. She felt it a painful disillusionment that the reconstruction of the old family happiness could be impeded by such a
disturbance, and she could not forgive her married sister because, due to feminine docility, the latter firmly avoided espousing either
cause. Thus, a whole series of scenes remained in Elisabeth's memory which were connected with a number of partially unuttered
grievances against her first brother-in-law. But her greatest grievance against him was the fact that for the sake of a prospective
promotion he moved his small family to a distant city in Austria, and thus helped to increase her mother's isolation. On this occasion
Elisabeth distinctly felt her inability and helplessness to afford her mother a substitute for her lost happiness, as well as the
impossibility of following out the resolution she made on the occasion of her father's death.

The marriage of the second sister seemed more promising for the future welfare of the family. The second brother-in-law, although
not of the same mental calibre as the first, was a man after the heart of delicate ladies, and his behaviour reconciled Elisabeth to the
institution of marriage and to the sacrifices it entailed. What is more, the second couple remained near her mother, and the child of
this brother-in-law and the second sister became Elisabeth's pet. Unfortunately, the year during which the child was born was
clouded by another event. The visual affliction of the mother demanded many weeks' treatment in a dark room, in which Elisabeth
participated. Following this, an operation proved necessary and the excitement connected with this occurred at the same time as the
first brother-in-law made preparations to move. Finally, the operation, having been skilfully performed, proved successful, and the
three families met at a summer resort. There Elisabeth, exhausted by the worries of the past months, had the first opportunity to
recuperate from the effects of the suffering and anxiety to which the family had been subjected since the death of her father.

But just during this sojourn in the summer resort, Elisabeth became ill with pain and weakness. These pains, which had been notice
able for a short while some time previously, manifested themselves severely for the first time after taking a warm bath at a small spa.
A long walk, actually half a day's hike a few days previously, was thought to have had some connection with the onset of the pains, so
that it was quite easy to gain the impression that Elisabeth at first became "fatigued," and then "caught cold."

From now on Elisabeth became the patient in the family. Following the advice of the physician, she spent the rest of the summer in
Bad Gastein, whither she went with her mother, but not without having a new worriment to think about. The second sister was again
pregnant, and the information as to her condition was quite unfavorable, so that Elisabeth could hardly decide to take the journey to
Gastein. After barely two weeks at Gastein both mother and sister were recalled because things were not well with the patient at
home.

An agonizing journey, which for Elisabeth was full of pain and anxious expectations, was followed by certain signs at the railroad
station which forbode the worst, and then, on entering the sickroom, they were confronted with the reality—that they had arrived
too late to take leave of the dying one.
Elisabeth not only suffered from the loss of this sister, whom she dearly loved, but almost as much from the thoughts instigated by
her death, and from the changes which it entailed. The sister had succumbed to heart trouble, which was aggravated by the
pregnancy.

The idea then came to her mind that heart trouble was the paternal inheritance of the family. It was then recalled that in her early
girlhood the deceased went through an attack of chorea with a slight heart affection. The members of the family then blamed
themselves and the physicians for permitting the marriage, and they could not help reproaching the unfortunate widower for
endangering his wife's health through two successive pregnancies without any pause. The sad thought that, after the rare conditions
for a happy marriage had been found, this happiness should have terminated in this way, constantly occupied Elisabeth's mind.
Moreover, she again saw everything go to pieces that she had planned for her mother. The widowed brother-in-law was inconsolable
and withdrew from his wife's family. It seemed that his own family, from whom he was estranged during his short and happy married
life, took advantage of the opportunity to draw him back into their own circle. There was no way of maintaining the former union;
out of regard for his unmarried sister-in-law, it would have seemed improper to live together with his mother-in-law, and as he
refused to relinquish his child, the only legacy of the deceased to the two ladies, they accused him for the first time of heartlessness.
Finally, and this was not the least painful, Elisabeth received some definite information concerning a disagreement between the two
brothers-in-law, the cause of which she could only surmise. It seemed that the widower made some financial demands, which the
other brother-in-law considered unjustifiable; indeed, in view of the mother's recent sorrow he could only designate it as a wicked
extortion. This then was the history of the ambitious and lovable young woman. Resentful of heir fate, embittered over the failure of
her little plans to restore the family lustre; of those dear to her, some were dead, some away, and some estranged—without any
inclination to seek refuge in the love of a strange man, she lived thus for a year and a half away from almost all social relations
nursing her mother and her pains.

If one could forget greater suffering, and wished to read one's self into the psychic life of a girl, one could hardly deny Miss Elisabeth
a sincere human sympathy. But what about the physician's interest in this sorrowful tale and its relation to her painful and weak gait;
what about the prospects of explaining and curing this case by the knowledge which we may perhaps obtain from these psychic
traumas?

For the physician the confession of this patient was at first a great disappointment. For, to be sure, it was a history composed of
banal mental shocks, from which we could neither explain why the patient became afflicted with hysteria, nor how the hysteria
assumed the form of the painful abasia. It explained neither the causation nor the determination of the hysteria in question. We
could perhaps assume that the patient had formed an association between her psychically painful impressions and bodily pains,
which she accidentally perceived simultaneously, and that now she utilized in her memory the physical sensation as a symbol for the
psychic. What motives she had for this substitution and in what moment this came about remained unexplained. To be sure, these
were questions whose nature "was not hitherto familiar to physicians. For it was customary to content one's self with the
information that the patient was constitutionally hysterical, and that under the intensive pressure of any kind of excitement she
could develop hysterical symptoms.

This confession offered even less for the explanation than for the treatment of the case. One could not conceive what beneficial
influence Miss Elisabeth could derive from recounting sad, familiar family experiences of the past years to a stranger, who could give
her in return only moderate sympathy, nor could one observe any improvement after the confession. During the first period of the
treatment the patient never failed to repeat to her physician: "I continue to feel ill, I have the same pains as before," and when she
accompanied this by a crafty and malicious glance, I could perhaps recall the words which old Mr. von R was wont to say about his
favourite daughter: "She is frequently pert and disputatious," but after all I had to confess that she was right.

Had I given up the patient at this stage of the psychic treatment, the case of Miss Elisabeth von R would have been of no importance
whatever for the theory of hysteria. But I continued my analysis because I felt sure that an understanding of the causation, as well as
the determination, of the hysterical symptoms could be gained from the deeper strata of consciousness.

I, therefore, decided to put the direct question to the broadened consciousness of the patient as to what psychic impression was
connected with the origin of the pain in the legs.

For this purpose the patient should have been put into deep hypnosis. But fortunately I was forced to realize that all my procedures
in that direction could not put the patient in any other state of consciousness than that in which she gave me her confession. Still, I
was very pleased that this time she abstained from triumphantly remonstrating with the words: "You see I really do not sleep. I
cannot be hypnotized." In such despair I conceived the idea of making use of the trick of pressing the head, the origin of which I have
thoroughly discussed in the preceding observation of Miss Lucie. This was done by requesting the patient unfailingly to inform me of
whatever appeared before her mind's eye or flashed through her memory at the moment of the pressure. She was silent for a long
time, and then admitted that on my pressure she thought of an evening in which a young man had accompanied her home from
some social affair, of the conversation that passed between them, and of her feelings on returning home to nurse her father.

With this first mention of the young man a new shaft was opened, the content of which I then gradually brought out. We dealt here
rather with a secret, for, with the exception of a mutual friend, no one knew anything of the relationship and the hopes connected
with it. It concerned the son of an old friendly family, who formerly lived in the neighbourhood.

The young man, being an orphan, attached himself with great devotion to her father, who guided him in his career, and this
veneration for the father was naturally extended to the ladies of the family. Numerous reminiscences of joint readings, exchange of
views, and remarks which had been repeated to her, marked the gradual growth of her conviction that he loved and understood her,
and that a marriage with him would not impose upon her the sacrifice that she feared. Unhappily, he was only slightly older than
she, and as yet far from independent. She, however, firmly resolved to wait for him.

With the serious illness of her father, and the necessity of nursing him, these relations became less frequent. The evening, which she
re called first, really marked the height of her feelings, but even then there was no exchange of ideas between them on the subject. It
was only at the urging of her family that she consented to leave the sick-bed that evening and attend the social affair where she was
to meet him. She wished to hasten home early, but she was forced to remain, and only yielded on his promising to accompany her
home. At no time had she entertained such a tender regard for him as during this walk, but after returning home at a late hour in this
blissful state and finding the condition of her father aggravated, she bitterly reproached herself for having sacrificed so much for her
own amusement. It was the last time that she left her sick father for a whole evening, and thereafter she saw her friend only rarely.
After the death of her father, he seemed to hold himself aloof out of respect for her sorrow, and business affairs later took him to
other regions. Gradually, she came to the realization that his interest in her was suppressed by other feelings and that he was lost to
her. This failure of her first love pained her as often as she thought of it.

In this relationship and in the above-mentioned scene to which it led, I had to seek the causation of the first hysterical pain. A
conflict, or a state of incompatibility, arose through the contrast between the happiness which she had not at that time denied
herself and the sad condition in which she found her father upon her arrival home. As a result of this conflict, the erotic ideas were
repressed from the associations and the affect connected with them was utilized in aggravating or reviving a simultaneously (or
somewhat previously) existing physical pain. It was, thus, the mechanism of a conversion for the purpose of defence, as I have shown
circumstantially in another place.¹

To be sure, we have room here for all kinds of observations. I must stress the fact that I did not succeed in demonstrating from her
memory that the conversion took place at the time of her returning home. I therefore investigated for similar experiences which
might have occurred while she was nursing her father, and I evoked a number of scenes, among which was one during which she had
to jump out of bed with bare feet in a cold room to respond to the repeated calls of her father. I was inclined to attribute to this
factor a certain significance, for in addition to complaining of pain in her legs, she also complained of tormenting sensations of
coldness. Nevertheless, here, too, I could not with certainty lay hold of the scene which could be designated as the scene of
conversion. This led me to admit that there was some gap in the explanation, until I recalled that the hysterical pains in the legs were
really not present at the time she nursed her father. From her memory she recalled only a single attack of pain lasting a few days, to
which at that time she paid no attention. I then directed my attention to the first appearance of the pains. Here I was successful in
awakening a definite memory. Just at that time a relative visited her; she could not receive him because she was ill in bed, and he
had the misfortune to find her ill on another occasion two years later. But the search for the psychic motive of these first pains failed
as often as it was repeated. I believed that I could assume that
¹"The Defence-Neuro-Psychoses" (1894), p. 81 ff. below.

these first pains were due to a slight rheumatic attack and really had no psychic basis, and I could also discover that this organic
trouble was the model for the later hysterical imitation, at all events that it occurred before the scene of being accompanied home.
That these mild organic pains should have continued for some time without her paying much attention to them was quite possible,
when we consider the nature of the situation. The obscurity resulting from this, namely, that the analysis pointed to a conversion of
psychic excitement into bodily pain at a time when such pain was certainly not perceived and not recalled—this problem I hope to be
able to solve in later considerations and by other examples.²
²I can neither exclude nor prove that this pain, especially of the thighs, was of a neurasthenic nature.
54 FREUD: Hysteria, esp 46c-d

The marriage of the second sister seemed more promising for the future welfare of the family. The second brother-in-law, although
not of the same mental calibre as the first, was a man after the heart of delicate ladies, and his behaviour reconciled Elisabeth to the
institution of marriage and to the sacrifices it entailed. What is more, the second couple remained near her mother, and the child of
this brother-in-law and the second sister became Elisabeth's pet. Unfortunately, the year during which the child was born was
clouded by another event. The visual affliction of the mother demanded many weeks' treatment in a dark room, in which Elisabeth
participated. Following this, an operation proved necessary and the excitement connected with this occurred at the same time as the
first brother-in-law made preparations to move. Finally, the operation, having been skilfully performed, proved successful, and the
three families met at a summer resort. There Elisabeth, exhausted by the worries of the past months, had the first opportunity to
recuperate from the effects of the suffering and anxiety to which the family had been subjected since the death of her father.

But just during this sojourn in the summer resort, Elisabeth became ill with pain and weakness. These pains, which had been notice
able for a short while some time previously, manifested themselves severely for the first time after taking a warm bath at a small spa.
A long walk, actually half a day's hike a few days previously, was thought to have had some connection with the onset of the pains, so
that it was quite easy to gain the impression that Elisabeth at first became "fatigued," and then "caught cold."

From now on Elisabeth became the patient in the family. Following the advice of the physician, she spent the rest of the summer in
Bad Gastein, whither she went with her mother, but not without having a new worriment to think about. The second sister was again
pregnant, and the information as to her condition was quite unfavorable, so that Elisabeth could hardly decide to take the journey to
Gastein. After barely two weeks at Gastein both mother and sister were recalled because things were not well with the patient at
home.



54 FREUD: Hysteria, 54b-59d

This ab-reaction benefited her much, but I was able to give her still more relief by taking a friendly interest in her present state of
affairs. With this object in view I sought an interview with Mrs. von R, whom I found to be an intelligent and refined lady, whose
courage to face life, however, was somewhat impaired through the last misfortunes. From her I learned that the accusation of rude
extortion, which the older brother-in-law had brought against the widower, and which was so painful to Elisabeth, had to be
retracted on closer investigation. The character of the young man remained untarnished; it was merely a misunderstanding, an easily
conceived difference of opinion concerning the valuation of money that could arise between the merchant, to whom money is only a
working tool, and the official—that is all there was to this seemingly so painful incident. I begged the mother to give Elisabeth all
explanations that she might here after need, and to offer her in the future that opportunity for unburdening her mind to which I had
accustomed her.

Naturally I was also anxious to know what chance there was for the fulfilment of the girl's present conscious wish. Here things were
less favourable! The mother stated that for some time she had had an inkling of Elisabeth's affections for her brother-in-law; of
course, she did not know that it had existed during the lifetime of her sister. Whoever saw them both in friendly intercourse—of late,
to be sure, only seldom—could entertain no doubt of the girl's anxiety to please him. However, neither she, the mother, nor the
advisers of the family, showed any particular inclination to bring about a matrimonial union between the two. The health of the
young man had not been very good and had received a setback through the death of his beloved wife, and it was not at all certain
that he had sufficiently recovered from the shock to enter into a new marriage. It was quite probable that this was the reason for his
reserve, perhaps also because he was not sure of his position and wished to avoid all obvious gossip. With such a reserve on both
sides, the solution for which Elisabeth was yearning was likely to fail.

I informed the girl of everything that I had heard from her mother and had the satisfaction of seeing her benefited by the explanation
concerning the money affair. On the other hand, I urged her to bear calmly the uncertainties of her future which could not be
dismissed. The advancing summer forced us to bring the treatment to an end. She now felt better, and, since we had discussed the
causes to which the pain could be traced, she no longer complained of pain. We both felt that the work had been finished, although I
felt that the ab-reaction of the suppressed love was really not as complete as it should have been. I regarded her as cured and urged
her to continue independently the solution after the way had been cleared for it, to which she agreed. She left with her mother for a
summer resort where they were to join the older sister and her family.

I still have something more to report about the further course of Miss Elisabeth von R's disease. A few weeks after our parting I
received a despairing letter from her mother, informing me that, at the first attempt to draw Elisabeth into a conversation about her
love affairs, she became very excited and refused to talk, and since then had suffered from violent pains. She was very indignant at
my having betrayed her confidence and was perfectly in accessible, so that the treatment seemed a complete failure. She wished to
know what was to be done, for of me she would hear nothing. I made no reply. It was to be expected that after she had been
relieved from my discipline she would make another attempt to reject her mother's interference and return to her reserve. I was,
however, quite certain that everything would adjust itself, and that my efforts had not been in vain. Two months later they returned
to Vienna and the colleague to whom I was grateful for the case informed me that Elisabeth was perfectly well, and that her be
haviour was normal although occasionally she had slight pains. Since then she has repeatedly sent me similar messages, each time
promising to visit me, which she has never done. This is quite characteristic of the personal relationship formed during such
treatment. My col league assured me that she could be considered cured. The relation of the brother-in-law to the family had not
been changed.

In the spring of 1894 I was informed that she would be present at a private ball to which I could gain access. I did not let the
opportunity escape me and saw my former patient gliding along in a rapid dance. Since then, following her own inclination, she
married a stranger.

                                                                             EPICRISIS

I have not always been a psycho-therapist, but like other neuro-pathologists I was educated to methods of focal diagnoses and
electrical prognosis, so that even I myself am struck by the fact that the case histories which I am writing read like novels and, as it
were, dispense with the serious features of the scientific character. Yet, I must console myself with the fact that the nature of the
subject is apparently more responsible for this issue than my own predilection. Focal diagnosis and electrical reactions are really not
important in the study of hysteria, whereas a detailed discussion of the psychic processes, as one is wont to hear it from the poet,
and the application of a few psychological formulae, allows one to gain an insight into the course of events of hysteria. Such case
histories should be considered like psychiatrical ones, but they have the advantage over the latter in the fact that they give the
intimate connection between the history of the disease and the morbid symptoms, a thing for which we are still looking in vain in the
histories of other psychoses.¹

With the description of the treatment I endeavoured to interweave the explanations which I gave about the case of Miss Elisabeth
von R, and it will perhaps not be superfluous to summarize here the essential features. I have discussed the character of the patient
and the features which repeat themselves in so many hysterics, and which we really cannot consider as degenerative. I mentioned
the talent, the ambition, the moral sensitiveness, the immense yearning for love, which found its gratification in the family, the
independence of her nature reaching beyond the womanly ideal, which manifested itself largely in obstinacy, pugnaciousness, and
shut-in-ness. According to the information of my colleague, no hereditary taints could be shown on either side of the family. Her
mother, to be sure, suffered for years from some indefinite neurotic depression, but her brothers and sisters, her father and his
family, belonged to the even-tempered and not to the nervous, type. There was no serious case of psychosis in any near relatives.

Her nature was influenced by painful emotions, the foremost of which was the debilitating influence of a long attendance upon her
beloved sick father.

That nursing of the sick plays such a significant role in the histories of hysterias has its good reasons. A number of effective factors,
which one finds here, are quite obvious; thus, the disturbance of the physical health through interrupted sleep, neglect of
nourishment, and the reaction of a constantly gnawing worriment on the vegatative functions. The most important factor, however,
is in my estimation to be found elsewhere. He whose mind is occupied
¹This situation no longer obtains in present-day psychiatry. Beginning with the Zurich School under the stimulation of Bleuler, the descriptive psychiatry of Kraepelin
long ago gave way to the interpretative psychiatry of the present.—Tr.

with the hundred different tasks of nursing which succeed each other continuously for weeks and months, gets into the habit, on the
one hand, of suppressing all signs of his own emotions, and on the other hand, his attention is soon turned away from his own
impressions because he has neither the time nor the strength to do them justice. Thus, the nurse accumulates in himself an
overabundance of affective impressions which he or she barely perceives clearly enough; at any rate, they are not dissipated by ab-
reaction; that is, he or she creates for himself the material for a retention hysteria. If the patient recovers, these impressions
naturally lose their value, but if he dies and one goes into a period of mourning during which only that which refers to the deceased
seems of value, the impressions waiting for discharge appear in turn, and, after a brief pause of exhaustion, the hysteria, the germ of
which originated during the nursing, bursts forth.

The same fact of subsequent adjustment to traumas accumulated during nursing is occasionally also encountered where the general
impression of being sick does not ensue, but where the mechanism of hysteria, nevertheless, can be noticed. Thus, I have known a
highly gifted but slightly nervous lady whose whole personality suggests the hysteric, yet she never became a burden to the doctor
and was never forced to interrupt the exercise of her duties. This lady had nursed three or four of her dear ones until they died,
which caused her each time a complete physical exhaustion, yet these sad duties have never made her sick. How ever, shortly after
the death of the patient she begins her work of reproduction, in which she reviews the scenes of the disease, and of the death. Each
day—one might say, at her leisure —she goes over again every impression, crying over it, and consoling herself. Such adjustment
continues through her daily occupations without any confusion of the two activities. Everything passes before her chronologically.
Whether the memory work of one day precisely corresponded to a day of the past, I am unable to say. I presume that it depends on
the leisure which is left to her by the current affairs of the household.

Aside from this "after crying," which follows these demises after short intervals, this lady periodically observed the anniversaries of
the various catastrophies, and here her vivid visual reproductions and her affective manifestations follow faithfully the dates. Thus,
for example, I found her in tears, and, on sympathetic inquiry as to what occurred on that day, she half irritably remarked, "Nothing
on that day except that Professor N was again here and gave us to understand that things were hopeless— at that time I had no time
to cry." She referred to the last illness of her husband, who died three years before. It would have been very interesting to know
whether she always repeated the same scenes on these recurring anniversaries, or whether, as I suppose, in the interest of my
theory, other details presented themselves each time for ab-reaction. I was, however, unable to find anything definite about this; the
wise and courageous woman was ashamed of the intensity with which, those reminiscences acted upon her.¹

I repeat that this woman was not sick and that subsequent ab-reaction, despite all resemblance, is still not a hysterical process; one
may ask why after one nursing there results a hysteria and after another none. It cannot lie in
¹To my surprise, I once discovered that such sub sequent ab-reaction—through other impressions than nursing—may form the content of an otherwise enigmatic
neurosis. It was the case of a pretty girl of nineteen, Miss Matilda H, whom I first saw with an incomplete paralysis of the legs, and months later I was again called
because her character had changed. She was depressed and tired of living, lacked all con sideration of her mother, and was irritable and unapproachable; The whole
picture of the patient did not seem to me to be that of an ordinary melancholia. She could easily be put into a somnambulic state, and I made use of this peculiarity to
impart to her each time commands and suggestions to which she listened in her profound sleep and responded with profuse tears, but which, however, caused but
little change in her condition. One day while hypnotized she became talkative and informed me that the reason for her depression was the breaking of her betrothal
many months before. She stated that, on closer acquaintance with her fiance, the things displeasing to her and her mother became more and more evident in him. On
the other hand, the material advantages of the engagement were too tangible to make the decision of a rupture easy; thus, both of them hesitated for a long time.
She then lapsed into a condition of indecision in which she allowed everything to pass apathetically and finally her mother pronounced for her the decisive "no."
Shortly afterwards she awoke as from a dream and began to occupy herself fervently with the thoughts about the broken betrothal, she began to weigh the pros and
cons, a process which she continued for some time. She continued to live in that time of doubt, and entertained daily the moods and the thoughts, which would have
been appropriate for that day. The irritability against her mother could only be explained by circumstances that existed at that time. Next to this mental activity she
found her present life a mere phantom, just like a dream. I did not again succeed in getting the girl to talk—I continued my exhortations during deep somnambulism. I
saw her each time burst into tears without, however, receiving any answer from her. But one day, it was near the anniversary of the engagement, the whole state of
depression disappeared. This was attributed to the success of my great hypnotic cure.




the personal predisposition, for the lady whom I have here in mind showed it in the most prolific manner.

I now return to Miss Elisabeth von R. While nursing her father, there occurred for the first time an hysterical symptom in the form of
a pain in a definite location on the right thigh. The mechanism of this symptom is fully explained on an analytic basis. It occurred in a
moment during which the ideas of her duties towards her sick father came into conflict with the content of her erotic yearning,
which she then entertained. Under vivid self-reproach, she decided in favour of the former and created for herself the hysterical
pain. According to the conception explained by the theory of conversion in hysteria, the process could be described as follows: She
repressed the erotic idea from her consciousness and changed the sum of the affect into somatic sensations of pain. Whether this
first conflict occurred only once, or repeated itself, is not clear. The latter is more probable. Quite a similar conflict—of a higher moral
significance, and even better demonstrated by the analysis—repeated itself after years and led to the aggravation of the same pain
and to its dissemination beyond its original limits. Again, it was an erotic idea which came into conflict with all her moral
conceptions, for her affection for her brother-in-law, both during the life and after the death of her sister, and the thought that she
should yearn just for this man, was very disagreeable to her< This analysis gives detailed information about this conflict which
represents the pivotal point in the history of her malady. The patient's affection for her brother-in-law might have begun to
germinate long ago, but in favour of its development was the physical exhaustion from the recent nursing, and her moral exhaustion
from years of disillusionment, which then began to breakdown her reserve and caused her to confess to herself the need of the love
of a man. During a relationship which extended over weeks (in that summer resort), this erotic desire attained full development
simultaneously with the pain, and analysis shows that during that time the patient was in a special psychic state, which, in
conjunction with the desire and pain, seems to afford an understanding of the process in the sense of the conversion theory.

I must place reliance on the statement that the patient's affection for her brother-in-law, intensive as it was, was not clearly known to
her except on certain rare occasions, and then only momentarily. If that were not so, she would have become conscious of the
incompatibility between this desire and her moral ideas, and would have had to endure the same mental agonies which I saw her
suffer after our analysis. Her reminiscences gave us no information concerning such suffering (these she spared herself), and as a
result, the love itself did not become clear to her. At that time, as well as during the analysis, her love for her brother-in-law existed
in the form of a foreign body in her consciousness without entering into any relationship with her other ideation. In reference to this
love there existed the peculiar condition of knowing and simultaneously not knowing; it was the condition of the split-off psychic
group. When we assert that this love was not clearly known to her, we mean exactly what we say. We do not mean a lower quality or
a lesser degree of consciousness, but a separation of the free associative mental process from the rest of the ideational content.

How did it happen that such an intensively accentuated group of ideas could be kept so isolated? For generally the role of an idea in
the associations actually increases with the size of its affect.

This question can be answered if we take into account two facts which, we can use as if proven: (i) That the hysterical pain originated
simultaneously with the formation pf these separate psychic groups, (2) that the patient exerted great resistance against the attempt
to bring about the association between the separate psychic groups and the rest of the content of consciousness, and, when the
union was nevertheless effected, she felt excessive psychic pain, Our conception of hysteria brings together these two factors with
the fact of the split ting of consciousness, by asserting that (2) contains the indication of the motive for the split ting of
consciousness, while (1) shows the mechanism of the same. The motive was that of defense, or the striving of the whole ego tb get
into harmony with this ideation group, and the mechanism was that of conversion; that is, instead of psychic pains which she spared
herself, there appeared physical pains. A transformation was thus initiated which resulted in a gain insofar as the patient had escaped
an unbearable psychic state; to be sure, this gain was obtained at the cost of a psychic anomaly, a splitting of consciousness and
physical suffering, the pains, upon which an astasia-abasia was constructed.

To be sure, I can give no directions as to how one can produce in himself such a conversion. Apparently it is not done as one
intentionally performs an arbitrary action; it is a process which takes place in a person under the impulse of the motive of defense, if
he has a tendency for it in his organization, or if it is brought about by temporary modifications.

One has the right to examine the theory more closely and ask: "What is it then that becomes transformed into physical pains?" The
cautious reply will be: "Something out of which psychic pains could have and should have been formed." If one wishes to venture
further and attempt a kind of algebraic formulation of the ideational mechanism, one might perhaps at tribute to the ideational
complex of this desire (which remained unconscious) a certain amount of affect and designate the latter quality as the thing
converted. A direct deduction of this conception would be that through such conversion the "unconscious love" forfeits so much of
its intensity that it becomes reduced to a weak idea, and its existence as a separate psychic group is made possible only through this
weakening. However, the present case is not capable of throwing light on this delicate matter. It probably corresponds only to an
imperfect conversion. From other cases it seems quite probable that there are also perfect conversions, and that in these the
unbearable idea actually becomes repressed, as only an idea of very little intensity could be repressed. After an associative union has
been reestablished, the patients assure us that since the origin of the hysterical symptoms their unbearable ideas had never
occupied their minds.

I have stated above that on certain occasions, though only transitorily, the patient consciously recognized the love for her brother-in-
law. Such a moment occurred when, for example, at the death-bed of her sister the thought flashed through her mind, "Now he is
free and I can become his wife." I must discuss the significance of these factors for the conception of the whole neurosis. However, I
think that in the assumption of a defence hysteria there is already the requisite that at least one such moment should have occurred.
For conscious ness really does not know in advance when such an unbearable idea will present itself. For the unbearable idea, which
is later excluded with its appendage for the formation of a separate psychic group, must have been originally in the mental activity,
else there would have been no conflict, to lead to its exclusion.¹ Just such moments should be designated as traumatic. It is in them
that the conversion takes place and results in the splitting of conscious ness and the hysterical symptoms. Everything tends to show
that in Miss Elisabeth von R there were a number of such moments (the scenes of the walking, morning meditation, bath, and at the
bedside of her sister), and perhaps new moments of this kind also occurred during the treatment. The multiplicity of such traumatic
moments is made possible by the fact that an experience, similar to the one which first initiated the unbearable idea, introduces new
emotions to the separated psychic groups and thus transitorily abolishes the success of the conversion/The ego is forced to occupy
itself with this suddenly reinforced and flared-up idea, and must later restore the former state through new conversions. Miss
Elisabeth, who was in constant relation with her brother-in-law, must have been particularly exposed to the appearance of new
traumas. A case whose traumatic history has been finished in the past would have been more desirable for this discussion.

I must now occupy myself with the point which I have designated as a difficulty for the understanding of this case history. On the
analytical basis, I assumed that the first conversion took place in the patient while she nursed her father, at the time when her duties
as a nurse came into conflict with her erotic yearnings, and that this process was the model for the later ones which led to the
outbreak of the disease in the Alpine spa. But, according to the patient's statement, she had not at all suffered from any pains and
weakness at the time of the nursing and the period following it, which I designated as the first period. To be sure, during the illness of
her father she was once bedridden for a few days with pains in her legs, but it is doubtful whether this attack already belonged to the
hysteria. A causal relation between these first pains and any psychic impressions could not be demonstrated by analysis; it is
possible, even probable, that at that time we dealt with a common rheumatic muscular pain. But if we should assume that this first
attack of pain was the result of an hysterical conversion in consequence of the rejection of erotic thoughts which, then existed, the
fact, nevertheless, remains that the pains
¹It is different in a hypnoid hysteria. Here the content of the separate psychic groups may never have been in the ego consciousness.

disappeared after a few days, so that the patient actually behaved differently than she seemed to show during the analysis. During
the reproduction of the so-called first period, all her statements concerning the illness and death of her father, the impressions
relating to her first brother-in-law, etc., all these were accompanied by manifestations of pain, while at the time she really
experienced these impressions she felt no pains. Is this not a contradiction which is likely to diminish considerably the confidence in
the explanatory value of such an analysis?

I believe that I can explain the contradiction by assuming that the pains—the product of the conversion—did not originate while the
patient experienced the impressions during the first period, but subsequently, that is, in the second period when the patient
reproduced these impressions in her mind. The conversion did not follow the fresh impressions, but the memories of the same. I
even believe that such a process is not at all unusual in hysteria and regularly participates in creating hysterical symptoms.
Nevertheless, as such an assertion does not seem plausible, I shall attempt to make it more credible by citing other experiences.

During a similar analysis, it once happened that a new hysterical symptom was formed during the treatment, so that I could attempt
its removal on the day after its origin.

I will describe the essential features of the history of this patient. They are simple, but not without interest.

Miss Rosalia H, twenty-three years old, who for a number of years made great efforts to educate herself as a singer, complained that
her beautiful voice did not obey her in certain notes. She felt choking and tightening sensations in the throat, so that the tones
sounded strained, and her teacher could, therefore, not yet permit her to appear in public. Although this imperfection affected only
her middle notes, it could not be explained on the basis of a defect of her vocal organs, for at times this disturbance did not show
itself and her teacher was very pleased with her, but at other times, the slightest excitement, seemingly with out provocation,
evoked the choking sensation, and prevented free expansion of the voice. It was not difficult to recognize in this annoying sensation
an hysterical conversion. Whether there was really a contracture of certain muscles of the vocal chords could not be verified.¹ In the
hypnotic analysis, which I under took with this girl, I found out the following concerning her vicissitudes and the ailments occasioned
through them. She became an orphan at an early age and was brought up by her aunt, who had many children and she had to share
the life of a most unfortunate family existence. The husband of this aunt, seemingly a pathological personality, abused his wife and
children in the most brutal manner, and what especially pained her was his unconcealed sexual preference for the servant and nurse
girls in the house. This became even more obnoxious as the children grew older. When her aunt died, Rosalia became the protectress
of the orphaned-children, who were harassed by their father. She took her duties seriously, fought through all conflicts, and had to
exert her greatest efforts to suppress the manifestations of her contempt for her uncle. It was then that the choking sensation in her
throat originated. Whenever she was compelled to swallow an affront, whenever she had to remain silent on hearing a provoking
accusation, she perceived a scratching in her throat, the tightening and failure of her voice; in brief, she had all the localized
sensations in her larynx and pharynx which now disturbed her in singing. It was conceivable that she sought the possibility of making
herself independent in order to escape the excitement and the painful impressions which were daily occurrences in her uncle's
house. An efficient music teacher took an unselfish interest in her, assuring her that her voice entitled her to choose the profession of
singing. She began secretly to take lessons of him, and because she often went for her lessons with the choking sensation in her
throat, following some violent scene in the house, a connection was formed between the singing and the hysterical paresthesia for
which a way was prepared by the sensitiveness of the vocal organs during singing. The apparatus of which she should have had free
control was filled
¹I had under observation another case in which a contracture of the masseters made it impossible for the artist to sing. The young lady in question, through painful
experiences in the family, was forced to go on the stage. While rehearsing in Rome, in great excitement, she suddenly perceived the sensation of being unable to close
her opened mouth and sank fainting to the floor. The physician, who was called, closed her jaws forcibly, but since that time the patient had been unable to open her
jaws' more than a finger's breadth and had to give up her newly chosen profession. When she came under my cafe; many years later, the motives for that excitement
apparently had been over for some time, for massage in a light hynosis sufficed to open her mouth widely. The lady has since then sung in public.
with the remnants of innervation from those numerous scenes of suppressed excitement. Since then she has left her uncle's house
and has moved to another city, so as to be away from the family, but her ailments were not benefited by it. No other hysterical
symptoms were discovered in this pretty and unusually bright girl.

I endeavoured to cure this retention-hysteria by a reproduction of all the exciting impressions and by subsequent ab-reaction. I
afforded her the opportunity of railing against her uncle in long speeches and of telling him the bare truth to his face, etc. The
treatment benefited her, but unfortunately she lived here under quite unfavourable conditions. She had no luck with her relatives.
She was the guest of another uncle who treated her with friendliness, but just for that reason she incurred the displeasure of her
aunt. The latter believed that her husband evinced too marked an interest in his niece and made it a point of opposing the girl's stay
in Vienna. She, herself, in her youth was obliged to relinquish a desire of becoming an artist and was now jealous of her niece
because she had the opportunity to develop her talent, not considering that it was not mere desire, but a wish to become
independent, which led her niece to take this step. Rosalia felt so uncomfortable in the house that she, for instance, did not dare to
sing or play the piano when her aunt was within hearing distance, and carefully avoided either singing or playing anything for her
aged uncle—her mother's brother —whenever her aunt was home: While I was endeavouring to efface the traces of the old
excitements, new ones originated through these relations with her hosts, and finally interfered with the success of my treatment,
and prematurely interrupted the cure.

One day the patient came to me with a new symptom hardly twenty-four hours old. She complained of a disagreeable prickling
sensation in the fingertips, which had manifested itself every few hours since the day before, and forced her to make very peculiar
jerky movements. I could not see the attack; otherwise, I would have guessed the cause from seeing the motions of the fingers, but I
immediately endeavoured to trace through hypnotic analysis the causation of this symptom (it was really a minor hysterical attack).
As the whole thing existed only for a short time, I hoped to be able to explain it and quickly remove it. To my surprise, she
reproduced, without any hesitation in chronological order, a whole row of scenes beginning in her early childhood. All these had
perhaps the same characteristics in the fact that she had suffered an injustice with out defense, something which could make her
fingers jerk; for example, scenes like the one-off being forced to hold out her hand in school while the teacher struck it with a ruler.
But they were all banal causes, to which I would have. gladly opposed the right to enter into the aetiology of hysterical symptoms. It
was different, however, with one scene of her early girl hood, which was connected with the others. The bad uncle who suffered
from rheumatism asked her to massage his back. She did not dare re fuse him. He was in bed while she was doing it and he suddenly
threw off the covers jumped up, and attempted to grab her and throw her down. She naturally stopped the massage and in a
moment escaped and locked herself in her own room. She evidently did not like to recall this experience and could not say whether
she had seen anything when the man suddenly exposed himself. The sensations in the fingers could be explained as due to the
suppressed impulse to punish him, or it might simply have originated from the fact that she was at that time massaging him. Only
after, this scene did she begin to talk about the one which she experienced yesterday after which the sensitive ness and jerkiness of
the fingers appeared as a recurring memory symbol. The uncle with whom she now lived begged her to play some thing for him. She
sat at the piano and accompanied herself singing, believing that her aunt was out. Suddenly she appeared in the doorway, Rosalia
jumped up, closed the piano, and flung away the sheet of music. We can guess what memories came to her mind, and the train of
thought which she tried to ward off at that moment, for the exasperation brought on by the unjust accusation should have really
urged her to leave the house, but on account of her illness she was forced to remain in Vienna and had no other shelter. The
movement of the fingers which I saw during the reproduction of this scene resembled a continuous jerking, as if one literally and
figuratively would reject something like throwing away a sheet of music or rejecting an unreasonable demand.

She was quite positive in her assurance that she did not perceive the symptom before, that it was not caused by the scenes
previously related. Was there anything else to be assumed except that the scene experienced yesterday had in the first place
awakened the recollection of a former similar content, and that it then developed into a memory symbol for the whole group of
recollections? The conversion was, on the one hand, furnished with newly experienced affects, and, on the other, with recollected
affects.

When we- consider this state of affairs, we must admit that in the origin of hysterical symptoms such a process is the rule rather than
the exception. Whenever I seek for the determinants of such states, I frequently find not a single but a group of similar traumatic
motives.¹ In some of these cases it could be ascertained that this particular symptom had already existed for a short time after the
first trauma and then subsided, but reappeared after the next trauma and became fixed. Yet, no real distinction can be made
between those of temporary appearance and those which remained entirely latent causations. In a large majority of cases, it was
also found that the first trauma had left no symptoms, while a later trauma of the same kind produced a symptom for the origin of
which the cooperation of the former motives could not be dispensed with, and for the solution of which it required a consideration
of all the motives. Translating this into the language of conversion theory, this undeniable fact of the summation of traumas and the
erstwhile latency of the symptoms simply means that the conversion can be brought about from a fresh, as well as from a
remembered, affect, and this assumption fully explains the contradiction which seems to exist in the history and analysis of Miss
Elisabeth von R.
¹Compare here the nice examples of Mrs. Emmy in case II of Studien ubef Hysterie, 1895.




54 FREUD: Hysteria, esp 58b-c

I have stated above that on certain occasions, though only transitorily, the patient consciously recognized the love for her brother-in-
law. Such a moment occurred when, for example, at the death-bed of her sister the thought flashed through her mind, "Now he is
free and I can become his wife." I must discuss the significance of these factors for the conception of the whole neurosis. However, I
think that in the assumption of a defence hysteria there is already the requisite that at least one such moment should have occurred.
For conscious ness really does not know in advance when such an unbearable idea will present itself. For the unbearable idea, which
is later excluded with its appendage for the formation of a separate psychic group, must have been originally in the mental activity,
else there would have been no conflict, to lead to its exclusion.¹ Just such moments should be designated as traumatic. It is in them
that the conversion takes place and results in the splitting of conscious ness and the hysterical symptoms. Everything tends to show
that in Miss Elisabeth von R there were a number of such moments (the scenes of the walking, morning meditation, bath, and at the
bedside of her sister), and perhaps new moments of this kind also occurred during the treatment. The multiplicity of such traumatic
moments is made possible by the fact that an experience, similar to the one which first initiated the unbearable idea, introduces new
emotions to the separated psychic groups and thus transitorily abolishes the success of the conversion/The ego is forced to occupy
itself with this suddenly reinforced and flared-up idea, and must later restore the former state through new conversions. Miss
Elisabeth, who was in constant relation with her brother-in-law, must have been particularly exposed to the appearance of new
traumas. A case whose traumatic history has been finished in the past would have been more desirable for this discussion.

I must now occupy myself with the point which I have designated as a difficulty for the understanding of this case history. On the
analytical basis, I assumed that the first conversion took place in the patient while she nursed her father, at the time when her duties
as a nurse came into conflict with her erotic yearnings, and that this process was the model for the later ones which led to the
outbreak of the disease in the Alpine spa. But, according to the patient's statement, she had not at all suffered from any pains and
weakness at the time of the nursing and the period following it, which I designated as the first period. To be sure, during the illness of
her father she was once bedridden for a few days with pains in her legs, but it is doubtful whether this attack already belonged to the
hysteria. A causal relation between these first pains and any psychic impressions could not be demonstrated by analysis; it is
possible, even probable, that at that time we dealt with a common rheumatic muscular pain. But if we should assume that this first
attack of pain was the result of an hysterical conversion in consequence of the rejection of erotic thoughts which, then existed, the
fact, nevertheless, remains that the pains
¹It is different in a hypnoid hysteria. Here the content of the separate psychic groups may never have been in the ego consciousness.

disappeared after a few days, so that the patient actually behaved differently than she seemed to show during the analysis. During
the reproduction of the so-called first period, all her statements concerning the illness and death of her father, the impressions
relating to her first brother-in-law, etc., all these were accompanied by manifestations of pain, while at the time she really
experienced these impressions she felt no pains. Is this not a contradiction which is likely to diminish considerably the confidence in
the explanatory value of such an analysis?



54 FREUD: Hysteria, 83a

These fluctuations of intensity on the part of the hysterical symptom recur as often as one of its new and pathogenic reminiscences is
attacked; the symptom remains, as it were, all the time on-the order .of the day. If it is necessary to drop for a while the thread upon
which this symptom hangs, the symptom, too, merges into obscurity in order to emerge again at a later period of. the analysis. This
play continues until, through the completion of the pathogenic material, there occurs a definite adjustment of this symptom.

Strictly speaking, the hysterical symptom does not behave here differently than a memory picture or a reproduced thought which is
evoked by the pressure of the hand. Here, as there, the adjustment necessitates the same obsessing obstinacy of recurrence in the
memory of the patient. The difference lies only in the apparent spontaneous appearance of the hysterical symptom, whereas one
readily recalls having himself provoked the scenes and ideas. But in reality the memory symbols run in an uninterrupted series from
the unchanged memory remnants of affectful experiences and thinking-acts to the hysterical symptoms.
54 FREUD: Hysteria, 83d-85d

Usually the deeper one penetrates into the above described layers of the psychic structure, the more obscure and difficult the work
will at first become. But once the nucleus is reached, light ensues and there is no more fear that a strong gloom will overcast the
condition of the patient. However, the reward of the labour, the cessation of symptoms of the dis ease can be expected only when
the full analysis of every individual symptom has been accomplished ; indeed, where the individual symptoms are connected through
many junctures, one is not even encouraged by partial successes during the work. By virtue of the great number of existing causal
connections every unadjusted pathogenic idea acts as a motive for the complete creation of the neurosis, and only with the last word
of the analysis does the whole picture of the disease disappear, very similarly to the behaviour of the individually reproduced
reminiscence.

If a pathogenic reminiscence or a pathogenic connection which was previously withdrawn from the ego-consciousness is revealed by
the work of the analysis and inserted into the ego, one can observe in the psychic personality which was thus enriched the many
ways in which it gave utterance to its gain. Especially does it frequently happen that, after the patients have been painstakingly
forced to a certain knowledge, they say: "Why I have known that all the time, I could have told you that before." Those who have
more insight recognize this afterwards as a self-deception and accuse themselves of ingratitude. In general, the position that the ego
takes towards the new acquisition depends upon the stratum of the analysis from which the latter originates. What ever belongs to
the outermost layers is recognized without any difficulty, for it always remained in the possession of the ego, and the only thing that
was new to the ego was its connection with the deeper layers of the pathogenic material. Whatever is brought to light from these
deeper layers also finds appreciation and recognition, but frequently only after long hesitation and reflection. Of course, visual
memory pictures are here more difficult to deny than reminiscences of mere streams of thought. Not very seldom the patient will at
first say, "It is possible that I thought of that, but I cannot recall it," and only after a longer familiarity with this assumption
recognition will appear. He then recalls and even verifies by side associations that he once really had this thought. During the
analysis, I make it a point of considering the value of an emerging reminiscence independently of the patient's recognition. I am not
tired of repeating that we are obliged to accept everything that we bring to light with our means. Should there be anything unreal or
incorrect in the material thus revealed, the connection will later teach us to separate it. I may add that I rarely ever have occasion
subsequently to withdraw the recognition from a reminiscence which I had preliminarily admitted. In spite of the deceptive
appearance of an urgent contradiction, whatever came to the surface finally proved itself correct.

Those ideas which originate in the deepest layer, and from the nucleus of the pathogenic organization, are recognized by the patient
as reminiscences only with the greatest difficulty. Even after everything is accomplished, when the patients are overcome by the
logical force and are convinced of the curative effect accompanying the emergence of this idea—I say even if the patients themselves
assume that they have thought "so and so," they often add, "but to recall that I have thought so, I can not." One readily comes to an
understanding with them by saying that these were unconscious thoughts. But how should we note this state of affairs in our own
psychological views? Should we pay no heed to the patient's demurring recognition, which has no motive after the work has been
completed; should we assume that it is really a question of thoughts which never occurred, and for which there was only a possibility
of existence, so that the therapy consisted in the consummation of a psychic act which at that time was omitted? It is obviously
impossible to state anything about it, that is, to state anything concerning the condition of the pathogenic material previous to the
analysis, before one has thoroughly explained his psychological views, especially concerning the essence of consciousness. It is,
however, a fact worthy of reflection that in such analyses one can follow a stream of thought from the conscious into the
unconscious (that is, absolutely not recognized as a reminiscence), thence draw it for some distance through consciousness, and
again see it end in the unconscious; and yet this alteration of the "psychic elucidation" would change nothing in it, in its logic, and in
the connection of its single parts. Should I, then, have this stream of thought freely before me, I could not conjecture what part was,
and what part was not, recognized by the patient as a reminiscence. In a measure, I see only the points of the stream of thought that
merge into the unconscious, just the reverse of that which has been claimed concerning our normal psychic processes.

I have still another theme to treat which plays an undesirably great part in the work of such a cathartic analysis. I have already
admitted the possibility that the pressure procedure may. fail, and despite all assurance and urging it may evoke no reminiscences. I
also stated that two possibilities are to be considered: there is really nothing to evoke, in the place where we investigate—that can
be recognized by the perfectly calm expression of the patient—or, we have struck against a resistance to be overcome only at some
future time. We are confronted with a new layer into which we cannot as yet penetrate, and this can again be read from the drawn
and psychic exertion of the patient's expression. A third cause may be possible which also indicates an obstacle, not from within, but
externally. This cause occurs when the relation of the patient to the physician is disturbed, and signifies the worst obstacle that can
be encountered. One can expect this in every more serious analysis.
I have already alluded to the important role falling to the personality of the physician in the creation of motives which are to
overcome the psychic force of the resistance. In not a few cases, especially in women and where we deal with explanations of erotic
streams of thoughts, the cooperation of the patients becomes a personal sacrifice which must be recompensed by some kind of a
substitute for love. The great effort and the patient friendliness- of the physician must suffice for such substitutes. If this relation of
the patient to the physician is disturbed, the readiness of the patient's collaboration fails; if the physician desires information
concerning the next pathogenic idea, the patient is confronted by the consciousness of the unpleasantness which has accumulated in
her against the physician. As far as I have discovered, this obstacle occurs in three principal cases.

1. In personal estrangement, if the patient believes herself slighted, disparaged, and insulted, or if she hears unfavourable accounts
concerning the physician and his methods of treatment. This is the least serious case, This obstacle can readily be overcome by
discussion and explanation, although the sensitiveness and the suspicion of hysterics can occasionally manifest itself in unimaginable
dimensions.

2. If the patient is seized with the fear that she is becoming too dependent on her physician, that in his presence she loses her
independence and could even become sexually dependent upon him; this case is more significant because it is less determined
individually. The occasion for this obstacle lies in the nature of the therapeutic distress. The patient has now a new motive for
resistance which manifests itself not only in a certain reminiscence, but at each attempt of the treatment. Whenever the pressure
procedure is started, the patient usually complains of headache. Her new motive for the resistance remains for the most part
unconscious, and she manifests it by a newly created hysterical symptom. The headache signifies the aversion towards being
influenced.

3. If the patient fears lest the painful ideas emerging from the content of the analysis would be transferred to the physician. This
happens frequently, and, indeed, in many analyses it is a regular occurrence. The transference to the physician occurs through false
connections. I must here give an example. The origin of a certain hysterical symptom in one of my hysterical patients was the wish
she entertained years ago, which was immediately banished into the unconscious, that the man with whom she at that time
conversed would heartily grasp her and force a kiss on her. After the ending of a session, such a wish occurred to the patient in
reference to me. She was horrified and spent a sleepless night, and at the next session, although she did not refuse the treatment
she was totally unfit for the work. After I had discovered the obstacle and removed it, the work continued. The wish that so
frightened the patient appeared as the next pathogenic reminiscence, that is, as the one now required by the logical connection. It
came about in the following manner: The content of the wish at first appeared in the patient's consciousness which would have
transferred this wish into the past. Through the associative force prevailing in her consciousness, the existing wish became connected
with my own person, with which the patient could naturally occupy herself, and in this mesalliance—which I call a false connection—
the same affect awakened which originally forced the patient to banish this clandestine wish. Now that I have discovered this, I can
presuppose in every similar claim on my personality that this is another transference and false connection. It is remark able how the
patient falls a victim to deception on every new occasion.

No analysis can be brought to an end if one does riot know how to meet the resistances resulting from the causes mentioned. The
Way can be found if one bears in mind that the new symptom produced after the old model should be treated like the old
symptoms/In the first place, it is necessary to make the patient conscious of the obstacle. In one of my patients; in whom I had cause
to assume an unconscious idea like the one mentioned above in 2, I met it for the first time with an unexpected attack. I told her that
there must have originated soma obstacle, arid then pressed her head. She then said, surprisingly, "I see you sitting here on the chair,
but that is nonsense, what can that mean?" But now I could explain it.



54 FREUD: Hysteria, esp 84b

Those ideas which originate in the deepest layer, and from the nucleus of the pathogenic organization, are recognized by the patient
as reminiscences only with the greatest difficulty. Even after everything is accomplished, when the patients are overcome by the
logical force and are convinced of the curative effect accompanying the emergence of this idea—I say even if the patients themselves
assume that they have thought "so and so," they often add, "but to recall that I have thought so, I can not." One readily comes to an
understanding with them by saying that these were unconscious thoughts. But how should we note this state of affairs in our own
psychological views? Should we pay no heed to the patient's demurring recognition, which has no motive after the work has been
completed; should we assume that it is really a question of thoughts which never occurred, and for which there was only a possibility
of existence, so that the therapy consisted in the consummation of a psychic act which at that time was omitted? It is obviously
impossible to state anything about it, that is, to state anything concerning the condition of the pathogenic material previous to the
analysis, before one has thoroughly explained his psychological views, especially concerning the essence of consciousness. It is,
however, a fact worthy of reflection that in such analyses one can follow a stream of thought from the conscious into the
unconscious (that is, absolutely not recognized as a reminiscence), thence draw it for some distance through consciousness, and
again see it end in the unconscious; and yet this alteration of the "psychic elucidation" would change nothing in it, in its logic, and in
the connection of its single parts. Should I, then, have this stream of thought freely before me, I could not conjecture what part was,
and what part was not, recognized by the patient as a reminiscence. In a measure, I see only the points of the stream of thought that
merge into the unconscious, just the reverse of that which has been claimed concerning our normal psychic processes.



54 FREUD: Hysteria, 116b-118a,c

                                                                        CHAPTER 9

                                                    MY VIEWS ON THE ROLE OF SEXUALITY IN THE

                                                                AETIOLOGY OF THE NEUROSIS¹

I am of the opinion that my theory on the aetiological significance of the sexual factor in
¹From Lowenfeld, Sexualleben und Nervenleiden, 4th ed., 1906.

the neuroses can be best appreciated by following its development. I will by no means make any effort to deny that it passed through
an evolution during which it underwent a change. My colleagues can find the assurance in this ad mission that this theory is nothing
other than the result of continued and painstaking experiences. In contradistinction to this, whatever originates from speculation can
certainly appear complete at one go and continue unchanged.

Originally the theory had reference only to the morbid pictures comprehended as neurasthenia, in which I found two types which
occasionally appeared pure, and which I described as actual neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis. For it was always known that sexual
factors could play a part in the causation of these forms, but they were found neither regularly effective, nor did we think of
conceding to them a precedence over other aetiological influences. I was above all surprised at the frequency of coarse disturbances
in the vita sexualis of nervous patients. The more I was in quest of such disturbances during which I remembered that all men
conceal the truth in things sexual, and the more skilful I became in continuing the examination despite the incipient negation, the
more regularly such disease-forming factors were discovered in the sexual life, until it seemed to me that they were but little short of
universal. But one must from the first be prepared for similar frequent occurrences of sexual irregularities under the stress of the
social relations of our society, and one could therefore remain in doubt as to what part of the deviation from the normal sexual
function is to be considered as a morbid cause. I could, therefore, only place less value on the regular demonstration of sexual noxae
than on other experiences which appeared to me to be less equivocal. It was found that the form of the malady, be it neurasthenia
or anxiety neurosis, shows a constant relation to the form of the sexual injury. In the typical cases of neurasthenia, we could always
demonstrate masturbation or accumulated pollutions, while in anxiety neurosis we could find such factors as coitus interruptus,
frustrated excitement, etc. The factor of insufficient discharge of generated libido seemed to be common to both. Only after this
experience, which is easy to gain and very often confirmed, had I the courage to claim for the sexual influences a prominent place in
the aetiology of the neurosis. It also happened that the mixed forms of neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis, occurring so often,
showed the admixture of the aetiologies accepted for both, and that such a bipartition in the form of the manifestations of the
neurosis seemed to accord well with the polar characters of sexuality (male and female).

At the same time, while I assigned to sexuality this significance in the origin of the simple neurosis, I still professed for the psycho
neuroses (hysteria and obsessions) a purely psychological theory in which the sexual factor was no differently considered than any
other emotional sources. Together with J. Breuer, and in addition to observations which he had made on his hysterical patients fully a
decade before, I have studied the mechanism of the origin of hysterical symptoms by the awakening of memories in hypnotic states.
We obtained information which permitted us to cross the bridge from Charcot's traumatic hysteria to the common non-traumatic
hysteria. We reached the conception that the hysterical symptoms are permanent results of psychic traumas, and that the amount of
affect belonging to them was pushed away from conscious elaboration by special determinations, thus forcing an abnormal road into
bodily innervation. The terms strangulated affect, conversion, and ab-reaction, comprise the distinctive characteristics of this
conception.

In the close relations of the psycho-neuroses to the simple neuroses, which can go so far that the diagnostic distinction is not always
easy for the inexperienced, it could happen that the cognition gained from one sphere has also taken effect in the other. Leaving such
influences out of the question, the deep study of the psychic traumas also leads to the same results. If by the analytic method we
continue to trace the psychic traumas from which the hysterical symptoms are derived, we finally reach to experiences which belong
to the patient's childhood and concern his sexual fife. This can be found even in such cases where a banal emotion of a non-sexual
nature has occasioned the outburst of the disease. Without taking into account these sexual traumas of childhood, we could neither
explain the symptoms, find their determination intelligible, nor guard against their recurrence. The incomparable significance of
sexual experiences in the aetiology of the psychoneuroses seems therefore firmly established, and this fact remains until today one
of the main supports of our theory. If we represent this theory by saying that the course of the life long hysterical neurosis lies in the
sexual experiences of early childhood, which are usually trivial in themselves, it surely would sound strange enough. But if we take
cognizance of the historical development of the theory, and transfer the main content of the same into the sentence: "Hysteria is the
expression of a special behaviour of the sexual function of the individual, and that this behaviour was already decisively determined
by the first effective influences and experiences of childhood," we will perhaps be poorer in a paradox, but richer in a motive for
directing our attention to a hitherto very neglected and most significant after-effect of infantile impressions in general.

As I reserve the question whether the aetiology of hysteria (and compulsion neurosis) is to be found in the sexual infantile
experiences for a later more thorough discussion, I now return to the construction of the theory expressed in some small preliminary
publications in the years 1895-1896.V The bringing into prominence of the assumed aetiological factors permitted us at the time to
contrast the common neuroses, which are maladies with an actual aetiology, with the psychoneuroses which aetiology was in the
first place to be sought in the sexual experiences of remote times. The theory culminates in the sentence: In a normal vita sexualis no
neurosis is possible.

If I still consider today this sentence as correct, it is really not surprising that after ten years' labour on the knowledge of these
relations I passed a good way beyond my former point of view, and that I now think myself in a position to correct by detailed
experience the imperfections, the displacements, and the mis conceptions, from which this theory then suffered. By chance my
former rather meagre material furnished me with a great number of cases in which infantile histories, sexual seduction by grown-up
persons or older children, played the main role. I overestimated the frequency of these (otherwise not to be doubted!) occurrences,
the more so because I was then in no position to distinguish definitely the deceptive memories of hysterical patients concerning their
childhood from the traces of the real processes, whereas I have since then learned to explain many a seduction-fancy as an attempt
at defence against the reminiscences of their own sexual activity (infantile masturbation). The emphasis laid on the traumatic
element of the infantile sexual experience disappeared with
¹See chapter 7 above and "The Aetiology of Hysteria," Collected Papers, I.

this explanation, and it remained obvious that the infantile sexual activities (he they spontaneous or provoked) dictate the course of
the later sexual life after maturity. The same explanation, which really corrects the most significant of my original errors, perforce
also changed the conception of the mechanism of the hysterical symptoms. These no longer appeared as direct descendants of.
repressed memories of infantile sexual experiences, but between the symptoms and the infantile impressions there slipped in the
fancies (confabulations of memory) of the patients which were mostly produced during the years of puberty and which, on the one
hand, are raised from, and over, the infantile memories, and, on the other hand, are immediately transformed into symptoms. Only
after the introduction of the element of hysterical fancies did the structure of the neurosis and its relation to the life of the patient
become transparent. It also resulted in a veritable surprising analogy between these unconscious hysterical fancies and the romances
which became conscious as delusions in paranoia.

After this correction, the infantile sexual traumas were in a sense supplanted by the infantilism of sexuality. A second modification of
the original theory was not remote. With the accepted frequency of seduction in childhood, there also disappeared the enormous
emphasis of the accidental influences of sexuality to which I wished to shift the main role in the causation of the disease without,
however, denying constitutional and hereditary factors. I even hoped to solve thereby the problem of the selection of the neurosis,
that is, to decide by the details of the sexual infantile experience, the form of the psychoneurosis into which the patient may merge.
Though with reserve, I thought at that time that passive behaviour during these scenes results in the specific predisposition for
hysteria, while active behaviour results in compulsion neurosis. This conception I was later obliged to disclaim completely, though
some facts of the supposed connection between passivity and hysteria, and activity and compulsion neurosis, can be maintained to
some extent. With the disappearance of the accidental influences of experiences, the elements of constitution and heredity had to
regain the upper hand, but, differing from the view generally in vogue, I placed the sexual constitution in place of the general
neuropathic predisposition. In my recent work, Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex,¹ I have at
¹First published in 1905.

tempted to discuss the varieties of this sexual constitution, the components of the sexual impulse in general, and its origin from the
contributory sources of the organism.
Still in connection with the changed con ception of the sexual infantile traumas, the theory continued to develop in a course which
was already indicated in the publications of 1894- 1896. Even before sexuality was installed in its proper place in the aetiology, I had
already stated as a condition for the pathogenic efficaciousness of an experience that the latter must appear to the ego as
unbearable and thus evoke an exertion for defence. To this defence I have traced the psychic splitting—or, as it was then called, the
splitting of consciousness—of hysteria. If the defence succeeded, the unbearable experience with its resulting affect was expelled
from consciousness and memory; but under certain conditions the thing expelled, which was now unconscious, developed its
activity, and, with the aid of the symptoms and their adhering affect, it returned into consciousness, so that the disease
corresponded to a failure of the defence. This conception had the merit of entering into the play of the psychic forces, and hence
approximated the psychic processes of hysteria to the normal, instead of shifting the characteristic of the neurosis into an enigmatic
and no-further-analyzable disturbance.

Further inquiries among persons who remained normal furnished the unexpected result that the sexual histories of their childhood
need not differ essentially from the infantile life of neurotics, and that especially the role of seduction is the same in the former, so
the accidental influences receded still more in comparison to the factors of repression (which I began to use instead of defence). It
really does hot depend on the sexual excitements which an individual experiences in his childhood, but above all on his reactions
towards these experiences, and whether these impressions respond ed with repression or not. It could be shown that spontaneous
sexual manifestations of child hood were frequently interrupted in the course of development by an act of repression. The sexual
maturity of neurotic individuals thus regularly brings with it a fragment of sexual repression from childhood, which manifests itself in
the requirements of real life. Psycho-analysis of hysterical individuals shows that the malady is the result of the conflict between the
libido and the sexual repression, and that their symptoms have the value of a compromise between both psychic streams.



54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 200a-d

I have still no idea for what purpose I have worked out this relationship. It is certainly one to which I must unreservedly object. Yet it
is not very profound, for my uncle was a criminal, and my friend R is not, except in so far as he was once fined for knocking down an
apprentice with his bicycle. Can I be thinking of this offence? That would make the comparison ridiculous. Here I recollect another
conversation, which I had some days ago with another colleague, N; as a matter of fact, on the same subject. I met N in the street;
he, too, has been nominated for a professorship, and having heard that I had been similarly honoured he congratulated me. I refused
his congratulations, saying; "You are the last man to jest about the matter, for you know from your own experience what the
nomination is worth." Thereupon he said, though probably not in earnest: "You can't be sure of that. There is a special objection in
my case. Don't you know that a woman once brought a criminal accusation against me? I need hardly assure you that the matter was
put right. It was a mean attempt at blackmail, and it was all I could do to save the plaintiff from punishment. But it may be that the
affair is remembered against me at the Ministry. You, on the other hand, are above reproach." Here, then, I have the criminal, and at
the same time the interpretation and tendency of my dream. My uncle Joseph represents both of my colleagues who have not been
appointed to the professorship-the one as a simpleton, the other as a criminal.

Now, too, I know for what purpose I need this representation. If denominational considerations are a determining factor in the
postponement of my two friends' appointment, then my own appointment is likewise in jeopardy. But if I can refer the rejection of
my two friends to other causes, which do not apply to my own case, my. hopes are unaffected. This is the procedure followed by my
dream: it makes the one friend R; a simpleton, and the other, N, a criminal. But since I am neither one nor the other, there is nothing
in common between us. I have a right to enjoy my appointment to the title of professor, and have avoided the distressing application
to my own case of the information which the official gave to my friend R.

I must pursue the interpretation of this dream still farther; for I have a feeling that it is not yet satisfactorily elucidated. I still feel
disquieted by the ease with which I have degraded two respected colleagues in order to clear my own way to the professorship. My
dissatisfaction with this procedure has, of course, been mitigated since I have learned to estimate the testimony of dreams at its true
value. I should contradict anyone who suggested that I really considered R a simpleton, or that I did not believe N's account of the
blackmailing incident. And of course I do not believe that Irma has been made seriously ill by an injection of a preparation of propyl
administered by Otto. Here, as before, what the dream expresses is only my wish that things might be so. The statement in which my
wish is realized sounds less absurd in the second dream than in the first; it is here made with a skilful use of actual points of support
in establishing something like a plausible slander, one of which one could say that "there is something in it." For at that time my
friend R had to contend with the adverse vote of a university professor of his own department, and my friend N had himself, all
unsuspectingly, provided me with material for the calumny. Nevertheless, I repeat, it still seems to me that the dream requires
further elucidation.
I remember now that the dream contained yet another portion which has hitherto been ignored by the interpretation. After it
occurred to me that my friend R was my uncle, I felt in the dream a great affection for him. To whom is this feeling directed? For my
uncle Joseph, of course, I have never had any feelings of affection. R has: for many years been a dearly loved friend, but if I were to
go to him and express my affection for him in terms approaching the degree of-affection which I; felt in the dream, he would
undoubtedly be surprised: My affection, if it was for him, seems false and exaggerated, as does my judgment of his intellectual
qualities, which I expressed by merging his personality in that of my uncle; but exaggerated in the opposite direction. Now however,
a new state of affairs dawns> upon me. The affection in the dream does not belong to the latent content; to the thoughts behind the
dream; it stands in opposition tor this content; it is calculated to conceal the. knowledge conveyed by the interpretation. Probably
this is precisely its function. I remember with what reluctance I undertook the interpretation, how long I tried to postpone it, and
how I: declared the dream to be sheer nonsense. I know from my psycho-analytic practice how such a condemnation is to be
interpreted. It has no informative value, but 'merely, expresses an -affect. If my little daughter does not like/an apple which is offered
her, she asserts that the apple is bitter, without even tasting it. If my patients behave thus, I know that we are dealing with an idea
which they are trying to repress. The same thing applies to my dream. I do not want to interpret it because there is something in the
interpretation to which I object. After the interpretation of the dream is completed, I dis cover what it was to which I objected; it was
the assertion that R is a simpleton. I can refer the affection which I feel for R not to the latent dream-thoughts, but rather to this
unwilling ness of mine. If my dream, as compared with its latent content, is disguised at this point, and actually misrepresents things
by producing their opposites, then the manifest affection in the dream serves the purpose of the misrepresentation; in other words,
the distortion is here shown to be intentional—it is a means of disguise. My dream-thoughts of R are derogatory, and so that I may
not become aware of this the very opposite of defamation—a tender affection for him—enters into the dream.



54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 370b-c

The Marquis Hervey (Vaschide) declared that he had gained such power over his dreams that he could accelerate their course at will
and turn them in any direction he wished. It seems that in him the wish to sleep had accorded a place to another, a preconscious
wish, the wish to observe his dreams and to derive pleasure from them. Sleep is just as compatible with such a wish-resolve as it is
with some proviso as a condition of waking up (wetnurse's sleep), We know, too, that in all persons an interest in dreams greatly
increases the number of dreams remembered after waking.

Concerning other observations as to the guidance of dreams, Ferenczi states: "The dream takes the thought that happens to occupy
our psychic life at the moment, and elaborates it from all sides. It lets any given dream-picture drop when there is a danger that the
wish-fulfilment will miscarry, and attempts a new kind of solution, until it finally succeeds in creating a wish-fulfilment that satisfies in
one compromise both instances of the psychic life."

                               D. Waking Caused by Dreams. The Function of Dreams. The Anxiety Dream

Now that we know that throughout the night the preconscious Is oriented to the wish to sleep, we can follow the dream-process
with proper-understanding. But let us first summarize what we already know about this process. We have seen that day-residues are
left over from the waking activity of the mind, residues from which it has not been possible to withdraw all cathexis. Either one of
the unconscious wishes has been aroused through the waking activity during the day or it so happens that the two coincide; we have
already discussed the multifarious possibilities. Either already during the day or only on the establishment of the state of sleep the
unconscious wish has made its way to the day-residues, and has effected a transference to them. Thus there arises a wish transferred
to recent material; or the suppressed recent wish is revived by a reinforcement from the unconscious. This wish now endeavours to
make its way to consciousness along the normal path of the thought processes, through the preconscious, to which indeed it belongs
by virtue of one of its constituent elements. It is, however, confronted by the censorship which still subsists, and to whose influence
it soon succumbs. It now takes on the distortion for which the way has already been paved by the transference to recent material. So
far it is on the way to becoming something resembling an obsession, a delusion, or the like, i.e., a thought reinforced by a
transference, and distorted in expression owing to the censorship. But its further progress is now checked by the state of sleep of the
preconscious; this system has presumably protected itself against invasion by diminishing its excitations. The dream process,
therefore, takes the regressive course, which is just opened up by the peculiarity of the, sleeping, state, and in so doing follows the
attraction exerted on it by memory-groups, which are, in part only, themselves present as visual cathexis, not as translations into the
symbols of the later systems. On its way to regression it acquires representability. The subject of compression will be discussed later.
The dream-process has by this time covered the second part of its contorted course. The first part threads its way progressively from
the unconscious scenes or phantasies to the preconscious, while the second part struggles back from the boundary of the censorship
to the tract of the perceptions. But when the dream process becomes a perception-content, it has, so to speak, eluded the obstacle
set up in the Pcs by the censorship and the sleeping state. It succeeds in drawing attention to itself, and in being remarked by
consciousness. For consciousness, which for us means a sense-organ for the apprehension of psychic qualities, can be excited in
waking life from two sources: firstly, from the periphery of the whole apparatus, the perceptive system; and secondly, from the
excitations of pleasure and pain which emerge as the sole psychic qualities yielded by the transpositions of energy in the interior of
the apparatus. All other processes in the ψ-systems, even those in the preconscious are devoid of all psychic quality, and are there
fore not objects of consciousness, inasmuch as they do not provide either pleasure or pain for its perception. We shall have to
assume that these releases of pleasure and pain automatically regulate the course of the cathectic processes. But in order to make
possible more delicate performances, it subsequently proved necessary to render the flow of ideas more in dependent of pain-
signals. To accomplish this, the Pes system needed qualities of its own which could attract consciousness, and most probably
received them through the connection of the preconscious processes memory system of speech symbols, which was not de void of
quality. Through the qualities of this system, consciousness/hitherto only a sense organ for perceptions, now becomes also a sense-
organ for a part of our thought-processes. There are now, as it were, two sensory surfaces, one turned toward perception and the
other toward the preconscious thought-processes.



54 FREUD: Repression, 425c-427a,c

The third antithesis of love, the transformation of loving into being loved, represents the operation of the polarity of active and
passive, and is to be judged in the same way as in scoptophilia and sadism. We may sum up by saying that the essential feature in the
vicissitudes undergone by instincts is their subjection to the influences of the three great polarities that govern mental life. Of these
three polarities we might describe that of activity passivity as the biological, that of ego—external world as the real, and finally that
of pleasure—pain as the economic respectively.

That possible vicissitude undergone by an instinct which we call repression will form the subject of a further inquiry.

                                                                            Repression¹
One of the vicissitudes an instinctual impulse may undergo is to meet with resistances the aim of which is to make the impulse
inoperative. Under certain conditions, which we shall presently investigate more closely, the impulse then passes into the state of
repression. If it were a question of the operation of an external stimulus, obviously flight would be the appropriate remedy; with an
instinct, flight is of no avail, for the ego cannot escape from itself. Later on, rejection based on judgment (condemnation) will be
found to be a good weapon against the impulse. Repression is a preliminary phase of condemnation, something between flight and
condemnation; it is a concept which could not have been formulated before the time of psycho-analytic research.

It is not easy in theory to deduce the possibility of such a thing as repression. Why should an instinctual impulse suffer such a fate?
For this to happen, obviously a necessary condition must be that attainment of its aim by the instinct should produce "pain" instead
of pleasure. But we cannot well Imagine such a contingency. There are no such instincts; satisfaction of an instinct is always
pleasurable. We should have to assume certain peculiar circumstances, some sort of process which changes the pleasure of
satisfaction into "pain".

In order the better to define repression we may discuss some other situations in which instincts are concerned. It may happen that
an external stimulus becomes internal, for example, by eating into and destroying a bodily organ, so that a new source of constant
excitation and increase of tension is formed. The stimulus thereby acquires a far-reaching similarity to an instinct. We know that a
case of this sort is experienced by us as physical pain. The aim of this pseudo-instinct, however, is simply the cessation of the change
in the organ and of the pain accompanying it. There is no other direct pleasure to be attained by cessation of the pain. Further, pain
is imperative; the only things which can subdue it are the effect of some toxic agent in removing it and the influence of some mental
distraction.

The case of physical pain is too obscure to
¹Collected Papers, IV; first published in Zeitschrift, Vol. m (1915); reprinted in Sammlung, 4th Series.

help us much in our purpose. Let us suppose that an instinctual stimulus such as hunger remains unsatisfied. It then becomes
imperative and can be allayed by nothing but the appropriate action for satisfying it; it keeps up a constant tension of need.
Anything-like a re pression seems in this case to be utterly out of the question.

So repression is certainly not an essential result of the tension produced by lack of satisfaction of an impulse being raised to an
unbearable degree. The weapons of defence of which the organism avails itself to guard against that situation must be discussed in
another connection.
Let us instead confine ourselves to the clinical experience we meet with in the practice of psycho-analysis. We then see that the
satisfaction of an instinct under repression is quite possible; further, that in every instance such a satisfaction is pleasurable in itself,
but is irreconcilable with other claims and purposes; it therefore causes pleasure in one part of the mind and "pain" in another. We
see then that it is a condition of repression that the element of avoiding "pain" shall have acquired more strength than the pleasure
of gratification. Psycho-analytic experience of the transference neuroses, moreover, forces us to the conclusion that repression is not
a defence-mechanism present from the very beginning, and that it cannot occur until a sharp distinction has been established
between what is conscious and what is unconscious: that the essence of repression lies simply in the function of rejecting and
keeping something out of consciousness. This conception of repression would be supplemented by assuming that, before the mental
organization reaches this phase, the other vicissitudes which may befall instincts, e.g., reversal into the opposite or turning round
upon the subject, deal with the task of mastering the instinctual impulses.

It seems to us now that, in view of the very great extent to which repression and the unconscious are correlated, we must defer
probing more deeply into the nature of repression until we have learnt more about the structure of the various institutions in the
mind—and about what differentiates consciousness from the un conscious. Till we have done this, all we can do is to put together in
purely descriptive fashion some characteristics of repression noted in clinical practice, even though we run the risk of having to
repeat unchanged much that has been said elsewhere.

Now we have reason for assuming a primal repression, a first phase of repression, which consists in a denial of entry into
consciousness to the mental (ideational) presentation of the instinct. This is accompanied by a fixation; the ideational presentation in
question persists unaltered from then onwards, and the instinct remains attached to it This is due to certain properties of
unconscious processes of which we shall speak later.

The second phase of repression, repression proper, concerns mental derivatives of the re pressed instinct-presentation, or such trains
of thought as, originating elsewhere, have come into associative connection with it. On account of this association, these ideas
experience the same fate as that which underwent primal re pression. Repression proper, therefore, is actually an after-expulsion.
Moreover, it is a mistake to emphasize only the rejection which operates from the side of consciousness upon what is to be
repressed. We have to consider just as much the attraction exercised by what was originally repressed upon everything with which it
can establish a connection. Probably the tendency to repression would fail of its purpose if these forces did not co-operate, if there
were not something previously repressed ready to assimilate that which is rejected from consciousness.

Under the influence of study of the psycho neuroses, which brings before, us the important effects of repression, we are inclined to
over estimate their psychological content and to forget too readily that repression does not hinder the instinct-presentation from
continuing to exist in the unconscious and from organizing itself further, putting forth derivatives and instituting connections.: Really,
re pression interferes only with the relation of the instinct-presentation to one system of the mind, namely, to consciousness.

Psycho-analysis is able to show us something else which is important for understanding the effects of repression in the
psychoneuroses. It shows us, for instance, that the instinct-presentation develops in a more unchecked, and, luxuriant fashion if it is
withdrawn by repression from conscious influence. It ramifies like a fungus, so to speak, in the dark, and takes on extreme forms of
expression, which when translated and revealed to the neurotic are bound not merely to seem alien to him, but to terrify him by the
way in which they reflect an extraordinary and dangerous strength of instinct. This illusory strength of instinct is the result of an
uninhibited development of it in phantasy and of the damming up consequent on lack of real satisfaction. The fact that this last result
is bound up with repression-points the direction in which we have to look for the true significance of the latter.

In reverting to the contrary aspect, however, let us state definitely that it is not even correct to suppose that repression withholds
from consciousness all the derivatives of what was primally repressed. If these derivatives are sufficiently far removed from the
repressed instinct-presentation, whether owing to the process of distortion or by reason of the number of intermediate associations,
they have free access to consciousness. It is as though the resistance of consciousness, against them was in inverse proportion to
their remoteness from what was originally repressed. During the practice of the psycho-analytic method, we continually require the
patient to produce such derivatives of what has been repressed as, in consequence either of their remoteness or of distortion, can
pass the censorship of consciousness. Indeed, the associations which were quire him to give, while refraining from any consciously
directed train of thought or any criticism, and from which we reconstruct a conscious interpretation of the repressed instinct
presentation, are precisely derivatives of this kind. We then observe that the patient can go on spinning a whole chain of such
associations, till he is brought up in the midst of them against some thought-formation, the relation of which to what is repressed
acts so intensely that he is compelled to repeat his attempt at repression. Neurotic symptoms, too, must have fulfilled the condition
referred to, for they are derivatives-of-the repressed, which has finally by means of these formations wrested from consciousness the
right of way previously denied it.
54 FREUD: Unconscious, 440b-442b

                                                         V, Special Characteristics of the System Ucs

The differentiation we have drawn between the two systems within the mind receives fresh significance when we observe that
processes in the one system, Ucs, show characteristics which are not again met with in the system immediately above it.

The kernel of the system Ucs consists of instinct presentations whose aim is to discharge their cathexis; that is to say, they are wish
impulses. These instinctual impulses are coordinate with one another, exist independently side by side, and are exempt from mutual
con tradiction. When two wishes whose aims must appear to us incompatible become simultaneously active, the two impulses do
not detract one from the other or cancel each other, but combine to form an intermediate aim, a compromise.

There is in this system no negation, no dubiety, no varying degree of certainty: all this is only imported by the work of the censorship
which exists between the Ucs and the Pcs. Negation is, at a higher level, a substitute for repression. In the Ucs there are only
contents more or less strongly cathected.

Intensity of cathexis is mobile in a far greater degree in this than in: the other systems. By the process of displacement, one idea may
surrender to another the whole volume of its cathexis; by that of condensation it may appropriate the whole cathexis of several
other ideas. I have proposed to regard these two processes as distinguishing marks of. the so called primary process in the mind. In
the system Pcs the secondary process² holds sway; where a primary process is allowed to take its course in connection with elements
belonging to the system Pes, it appears comic and excites laughter.

The processes of the system Ucs axe time-less; i.e., they are not ordered temporally, are not altered by the passage of time, in fact
bear no relation to time at all. The time-relation also is bound up with the work of the system Cs.

The processes of the Ucs are just as little related to reality. They are subject to the pleasure-principle; their fate depends only upon
the degree of their strength and upon their conformity to regulation by pleasure and pain.

Let us sum up: exemption from mutual contradiction, primary process (motility of cathexis), timelessness, and substitution of psychic
for external reality—these are the characteristics which we may expect to find in processes belonging to the system Ucs.³

Unconscious processes can only be observed by us under the conditions of dreaming and of neurosis; that is to say, when the
processes of the higher system Pes revert to an earlier level by a certain process of degradation (regression). Independently they are-
unrecognizable, indeed cannot exist, for the system Ucs is at a very early stage overlaid by the system Pcs which has captured the
means of access to con
²Cf. Section VII of The Interpretation of Dreams, which is based upon ideas developed by J. Breuer in Studien uber Hysterie.
³We are reserving for a different context the mention of another notable privilege ov the system Ucs.



sciousness and to motility. The means of discharge for the system Ucs is by means of physical innervation leading to development of
affect, but even this outlet is, as we have seen, contested by the system Pes. Left to itself, the system Ucs would not in normal
conditions be able to bring about any purposive muscular acts, with the exception of those already organized as reflexes.

In order to grasp the full significance of the characteristics of the system Ucs described above, we should have to contrast and
compare them with those of the system Pes. But this would take us so far afield that I propose that we should once more call a halt
and not under take the comparison of the two till we can do so in connection with our discussion of the higher system: only the most
pressing points of all shall be mentioned at this stage.

The processes of the system Pes display, no matter whether they are already conscious or only capable of becoming conscious, an
inhibition of the tendency of cathected ideas towards discharge. When a process moves over from one idea to another, the first
retains a part of its cathexis, and only a small part undergoes displacement. Displacement and condensation after the mode of the
primary process are excluded or very much restricted. This circumstance caused Breuer to assume the existence of two different
stages of cathectic energy in mental life: one in which that energy is tonically bound, and the other in which it moves freely and
presses towards discharge. I think that this discrimination represents the deepest insight we have gained up to the present into the
nature of nervous energy, and I do not see how we are to evade such a conclusion. A meta-psychological presentation most urgently
calls for further discussion at this point, though perhaps that would still be too daring an undertaking.

Further, it devolves upon the system Pes to make communication possible between the different ideational contents so that they can
influence one another, to give them a relation to time, to set up the censorship or censorships, and to establish the institution of
testing reality and the reality principle. Conscious memory, too, seems to depend wholly on the Pes and should be clearly
distinguished from the memory-traces in which the experiences of the Ucs become fixed; it probably corresponds with the making of
a special record—a conception which we tried to employ as explaining the relation of conscious to unconscious ideas, but which we
have already discarded. In this connection, also, we shall find the means to put an end to our uncertainty regarding the name of the
higher system which at present we vaguely call sometimes the Pes and sometimes the Cs.

Here, too, it will be as well to utter a warning against over-hasty generalizations about what we have brought to light in regard to
apportioning the various mental activities to one or other of the two systems. We are describing the state of affairs as it appears in
the adult human being, in whom the system Ucs in the strict sense functions only as a stage preliminary to the higher organization.
The content and connections of this system as the individual develops, the significance it possesses in the case of animals—-these
are points on which no conclusion can be deduced from our description: they must be investigated independently. Moreover, in the
human being we must be prepared to find possible pathological conditions under which the two systems alter, or even exchange,
both their content and their characteristics.

                                            VI. Communication between the Two Systems,

It would certainly be wrong to imagine that the Ucs remains at rest while the whole work of the mind is performed by the Pes, that
the Ucs is something finished with, a vestigial organ, a residuum from the process of evolution; wrong also to assume that
communication be tween the two systems is confined to the act of repression, the Pes easting everything which disturbs it into the
abyss of the Ucs. On the contrary, the Ucs is living and capable of development and maintains a number of other relations to the Pes,
amongst them that of cooperation. To sum up, we must say that the Ucs is continued into its so-called derivatives, is accessible to the
influence of life,- perpetually acts upon the Pes, and even is, on its part, capable of influence by the latter system.

Study of the derivatives of the Ucs will altogether disappoint our expectations of a schematically clear division of the one mental
system from the other. This circumstance will certainly give rise to dissatisfaction with our results and will probably be used to cast
doubts upon the value of our way of distinguishing the two groups of mental processes. Our answer is, however, that we have no
other aim but that of translating into theory the results of observation, and we shall deny that there is any obligation on us to
achieve, at Our very first attempt, a theory that commends itself by its simplicity, in which all is plain sailing. We defend its
complexities so long as we find that they fit in with the results of observation, and we do not abandon our expectation of being
guided in the end by those very complexities to recognition of a state of affairs that is at once simple in itself and at the same time
answers to all the complications of reality.

Amongst the derivatives of the unconscious instinctual impulses, the character of which we have just described, there are some
which unite in themselves opposite features. On the one hand, they are highly organized, exempt from self-contradictoriness, have
made use of every acquisition of the system Cs, and would hardly be distinguished by our ordinary judgment from the formations of
that system. On the other hand, they are unconscious and are incapable of becoming conscious. Thus they belong according to their
qualities to the system Pes, but in actual fact to the Ucs. Their origin remains decisive for the fate they will undergo. We may
compare them with those human half-breeds who, taken all round, resemble white men, but betray their coloured descent by some
striking feature or other, oh account of which they are excluded from society and enjoy none of the privileges of white people. Of
such a nature are the phantasy-formations of normal persons as well as of neurotics, which we have recognized as preliminary
phases in the formation both of dreams and of symptoms, and which, in spite of their high degree of organization, remain repressed
and therefore cannot become conscious. They draw near to consciousness and remain undisturbed so long as they do not become
strongly cathected, but.as soon as a certain degree of this is exceeded, they are thrust back. Substitute formations are similar, more
highly organized derivatives of the Ucs; but these succeed in breaking through into consciousness, thanks to some favourable
relation, as, for example, when they coincide with a preconscious anti-cathexis.

When, on another occasion, we examine more closely the way in which entry into conscious ness is conditioned, we shall be able to
find a solution for some of. the difficulties arising here. At this point, it seems a good plan to contrast with the foregoing points of
view, which take their rise in consideration of the Ucs, one which presents itself from the direction of consciousness. Consciousness
regards the whole sum of mental processes as belonging to the realm of the preconscious. A very great part of this preconscious
material originates in the unconscious, has the characteristics of derivatives of the unconscious, and is subject to a censorship before
it can pass into consciousness. Another part of the Pcs can become conscious without any censorship. Here we light upon a
contradiction of an earlier assumption: from the point of view of repression, we were obliged to place the censorship which is
decisive for consciousness between the systems Ucs and Pcs. Now it becomes probable to us that there is a censorship between the
Pcs and the Cs. But we shall do well not to regard this complication as a difficulty, but to assume that to every transition from one
system to that immediately above it (that is, every advance to a higher stage of mental organization) there corresponds a new
censorship. As a corollary, we shall have, it is true, to discard the assumption of a continuous laying down of new records.
54 FREUD: General Introduction, 550d-557a

This is the clinical picture of this excellent woman's case. It did not require much experience of psychiatry to perceive that, in
contrast to other neurotics, she described her symptoms too mildly—as we say, dissimulated them—and that she had never really
overcome her belief in the anonymous letter.

Now what attitude does a psychiatrist take up to such a case? We know already what he would say to the symptomatic act of a
patient who does not close the waiting-room doors. He explains it as an accident, without interest psychologically, and no concern of
his. But he can not continue to take up this attitude in regard to the case of the jealous lady. The symptomatic action appears to be
unimportant; the symptom calls for notice as a grave matter. Subjectively it involves intense suffering, and objectively it threatens to
break up a family; its claim to psychiatric interest is therefore indisputable. First the psychiatrist tries to characterize the symptom by
some essential attribute. The idea with which this lady torments herself cannot be called nonsensical in itself; it does happen that
elderly husbands contract relationships with young women. But there is something else about it that is non sensical and
incomprehensible. The patient has absolutely no grounds, except the anonymous letter, for supposing that her loving and faithful
husband belongs to this category of men, otherwise not so uncommon. She knows that this communication carries no proof, she can
explain its origin satisfactorily; she ought therefore to be able to say to herself that she has no grounds for her jealousy and she does
even say so, but she suffers just as much as if she regarded her jealousy as well-founded. Ideas of this kind that are inaccessible to
logic and the arguments of reality are unanimously described as delusions. The good lady suffers therefore, from a delusion of
jealousy. That is evidently the essential characteristic of the case.

Having established this first point, our psychiatric interest increases. When a delusion cannot be dissipated by the facts of reality, it
probably does not spring from reality. Where else then does it spring from? Delusions can have the most various contents; why is the
content of it in this ease jealousy? What kind of people have delusions, and particularly delusions of jealousy? Now we should like to
listen to the psychiatrist, but he leaves us in the lurch here. He considers only one of our questions. He will examine the family
history of this woman and will perhaps bring us the answer that the kind of people who suffer from delusions are those in whose
families similar or different disorders have occurred repeatedly.

In other words, this lady has developed a delusion because she had an hereditary predisposition to do so. That is certainly
something; but is it all that we want to know? Is it the sole cause of her disease? Does it satisfy us to assume that it is unimportant,
arbitrary, or in explicable that one kind of delusion should have been developed instead of another? And are we to understand the
proposition—that the hereditary predisposition is decisive—also in a negative sense; that is, that no matter what experiences and
emotions life had brought her she was destined some-time or other to produce a delusion? You will want to know why scientific
psychiatry gives no further explanation. And I reply: "Only a rogue gives more than he has." The psychiatrist knows of no path leading
to any further explanation in such a case. He has to content himself with a diagnosis and, in spite of wide experience, with a very un
certain prognosis of its future course.

Now can psycho-analysis do better than this? Yes, certainly I hope to show you that even in such an obscure case as this it is possible
to discover something which makes closer comprehension possible. First, I shall ask you to notice this incomprehensible detail; that
the anonymous letter on which her delusion is founded was positively provoked by the patient herself, by her saying to the scheming
house maid the day before that nothing could be more awful than to hear that her husband had an intrigue with a young woman.
She first put the idea of sending the letter into the servant's mind by this. So the delusion acquires a certain independence of the
letter; it existed before hand as a fear—or, as a wish?—in her mind. Besides this, the further small indications revealed in the bare
two hours of analysis are noteworthy. The patient responded very coldly, it is true, to the request to tell me her further thoughts,
ideas, and recollections, after she had finished her story. She declared that nothing came to her mind, she had told me everything;
and after two hours the attempt had to be given up, because she announced that she felt quite well already and was certain that the
morbid idea would not return. Her saying this was naturally due to resistance and to the fear of further analysis. In these two hours
she had let fall some remarks, nevertheless, which made a certain interpretation not only possible but inevitable, and this
interpretation threw a sharp light on the origin of the delusion of jealousy. There actually existed in her an infatuation for a young
man, for the very son-in-law who had urged her to seek my assistance. Of this infatuation she herself knew nothing or only per haps
very little; in the circumstances of their relationship it was easily possible for it to dis guise itself as harmless tenderness on her part.
After what we have already learnt it is not difficult to see into the mind of this good woman and excellent mother. Such an
infatuation, such a monstrous, impossible thing, could not come into her conscious mind; it persisted, nevertheless, and
unconsciously exerted a heavy pressure. Something had to happen, some sort of relief had to be found; and the simplest alleviation
lay in that mechanism of displacement which so regularly plays its part in the formation of delusional jealousy. If not merely she, old
woman that she was, were in love with a young man, but if only her old husband too were in love with a young mistress, then her
torturing conscience would be absolved from the infidelity. The phantasy of her husband's infidelity was thus a cooling balm on her
burning wound. Of her own love she never became conscious; but its reflection in the delusion, which brought such advantages, thus
became compulsive, delusional and conscious. All arguments against it could naturally avail nothing; for they were directed only
against the reflection, and not against the original to which its strength was due and which lay buried out of reach in the
unconscious.

Let us now piece together the results of this short, obstructed psycho-analytic attempt to understand this case. It is assumed, of
course, that the information acquired was correct, a point which I cannot submit to your judgment here. First of all, the delusion is
no longer senseless and incomprehensible; it is sensible, logically motivated, and has its place in connection with an affective
experience of the patient's. Secondly, it has arisen as a necessary reaction to another mental process which has itself been revealed
by other indications; and it owes its delusional character, its quality of resisting real and logical objections, to this relation with this
other mental process. It is something desired in itself, a kind of consolation. Thirdly, the fact that the delusion is one of jealousy and
no other is unmistakably determined by the experience underlying the disease. You will also recognize the two important analogies
with the symptomatic act we analysed; namely, the discovery of the sense or intention behind the symptom and the relation of it to
something in the given situation which is unconscious.

This does not, of course, answer all the questions arising out of this case. On the contrary, it bristles with further problems, some of
which have not yet proved soluble at all, while others cannot be solved owing to the unfavourable circumstances met with in this
case. For in stance, why does this happily married lady fall in love with her son-in-law, and why does relief come to her in the form of
this kind of reflection, this projection of her own state of mind on to her husband, when other forms of relief were also possible? Do
not think that it is idle and uncalled for to propound these questions. We have already a good deal of material at hand to provide
possible answers. The patient had come to that critical time of life which brings a sudden and unwelcome increase of sexual desire to
a woman; that may have been sufficient in itself. Or there may have been an additional reason, in that the sexual capacity of her
excellent and faithful husband may have been for some years insufficient for the still vigorous woman's needs. Observation has
taught us that it is just such men, whose fidelity is thus a matter of course, who treat their wives with particular tenderness and are
unusually considerate of their nervous ailments. Neither is it unimportant, moreover, that the object of this abnormal infatuation
should be her daughter's young husband. A strong erotic attachment to the daughter, with its roots in the individual sexual
constitution of the mother, often manages to maintain itself in such a transformation. I may perhaps remind you in this connection
that the relation between mother-in-law and son-in-law has from time immemorial been regarded by mankind as a particularly
sensitive one, which among primitive races has given rise to very powerful taboos and precautions.¹ On the positive as well as on the
negative side it frequently exceeds the limits regarded as desirable in civilized society. Of these three possible factors, whether one of
them has been at work in the case before us, or two of them, or whether all three together have taken part, I cannot tell you; though
only because the analysis of the case could not be continued beyond the second hour.

I perceive now that I have been speaking entirely of things which you were not yet prepared to understand. I did so in order to carry
out the comparison between psychiatry and psycho analysis. But I may ask you one thing at this point: Have you observed anything
in the nature of a contradiction between the two? Psy
¹Cf. Totem and Taboo.

chiatry does not employ the technical methods of psycho-analysis, neglects any consideration of the content of the delusion, and in
pointing to heredity gives us but a general and remote aetiology instead of first disclosing the more scientific and immediate one. But
is any contradiction or opposition contained in this? Is not the one rather a supplement to the other? Is the hereditary factor
inconsistent with the importance of experience and would they not both work together most effectively? You will admit that there is
nothing essential in the work of psychiatry which could oppose psycho analytic researches. It is therefore the psychiatrists who
oppose it, and not psychiatry itself. Psycho-analysis stands to psychiatry more or less as histology does to anatomy; in one, the outer
forms of organs are studied, in the other, the construction of these out of the tissues and constituent elements. It is not easy to
conceive of any contradiction between these two fields of study, in which the work of the one is continued in the other. You know
that nowadays anatomy is the basis of the scientific study of medicine; but time was when dissecting human corpses in order to
discover the internal structure of the body was as much a matter for severe prohibition as practicing psycho-analysis in order to
discover the internal workings of the human mind seems today to be a matter for condemnation. And, presumably at a not too
distant date, we shall have perceived that there can be no psychiatry which is scientifically radical without a thorough knowledge of
the deep-seated unconscious processes in mental life.

There may be some of you who perhaps are friendly enough towards psycho-analysis, often attacked as it is, to wish that it would
justify itself in another direction also, that is, therapeutically. You know that psychiatric therapy has hitherto been unable to influence
delusions. Can psycho-analysis do so perhaps, by reason of its insight into the mechanism of these symptoms? No, I have to tell you
that it cannot; for the present, at any rate, it is just as powerless as any other therapy to heal these sufferers. It is true that we can
understand what has happened to the patient; but we have no means by which we can make him understand it himself. You have
heard that I could not continue the analysis of this delusion beyond the first preliminaries. Would you then maintain that analysis of
such cases is undesirable because it remains fruitless? I do not think so. It is our right, yes, and our duty, to pursue our researches
without respect to the immediate gain effected. The day will come, where and when we know not, when every little piece of
knowledge will be converted into power, and into therapeutic power. Even if psycho-analysis showed itself as unsuccessful with all
other forms of nervous and mental diseases as with delusions, it would still remain justified as an irreplaceable instrument of
scientific research. It is true that we should not be in a position to practise it; the human material on which we learn lives, and has its
own will, and must have its own motives in order to participate in the work; and it would then refuse to do so. I will therefore close
my lecture for today by telling you that there are large groups of nervous disturbances for which this conversion of our own advance
in knowledge into therapeutic power has actually been carried out; and that with these diseases, otherwise so refractory, our
measures yield under certain conditions, results which give place to none in the domain of medical therapy.

                                                         SEVENTEENTH LECTURE

                                                        The Meaning of Symptoms

In the last lecture I explained to you that clinical psychiatry troubles itself little about the actual form of the individual symptom or
the content of it; but that psycho-analysis has made this its starting-point, and has ascertained that the symptom itself has a meaning
and is connected with experiences in the life of the patient. The meaning of neurotic symptoms was first discovered by J. Breuer in
the study and successful cure of a case of hysteria (1880-82), which has since then become famous. It is true that P. Janet
independently reached the same result; in fact, priority in publication must be granted to the French investigator, for Breuer did not
publish his observations until more than a decade later (1893-95), during the period of our work together. Incidentally, it is of no
great importance to us who made the discovery, for you know that every discovery is made more than once, and none is made all at
once, nor is success meted out according to deserts. America is not called after Columbus. Before Breuer and Janet, the great
psychiatrist Leuret expressed the opinion that even the delusions of the insane would prove to have some meaning, if only we knew
how to translate them. I confess that for a long time I was willing to accord Janet very high recognition for his explanation of neurotic
symptoms, because he regarded them as expressions of "idees inconscientes" possessing the patient's mind. Since then, however,
Janet has taken up an attitude of undue reserve, as if he-meant to imply that the unconscious had been nothing more to him than a
manner of speaking, a makeshift, une faqon de parler, and that he had nothing "real" in mind. Since then I have not understood
Janet's views, but I believe that he has gratuitously deprived himself of great credit.

Neurotic symptoms then, just like errors and dreams, have their meaning and, like these, are related to the life of the person in
whom they appear. This is an important matter which I should like to demonstrate to you by some examples. I can merely assert, I
cannot prove, that it is so in every case; anyone observing for himself will be convinced of it. For certain reasons though, I shall not
take these examples from cases of hysteria, but from another very remarkable form of neurosis, closely allied in origin to the latter,
about which I must say a few preliminary words. This, which we call the obsessional neurosis, is not so popular as the widely known
hysteria; it is, if I may so express myself, not so noisily ostentatious, behaves more as if it were a private affair of the patient's,
dispenses almost entirely with bodily manifestations and creates all its symptoms in the mental sphere. The obsessional neurosis and
hysteria are the two forms of neurotic disease upon the study of which psycho-analysis was first built up, and in the treatment of
which also our therapy celebrates its triumphs. In the obsessional neurosis, however, that mysterious leap from the mental to the
physical is absent, and it has really become more intimately comprehensible and transparent to us through psycho-analytic research
than hysteria; we have come to understand that it displays far more markedly certain extreme features of the neurotic constitution.

The obsessional neurosis¹ takes this form: the patient's mind is occupied with thoughts that do not really interest him, he feels
impulses which seem alien to him, and he is impelled to perform actions which not only afford him no pleasure but from which he is
powerless to desist. The thoughts (obsessions) may be meaningless in themselves or only of no interest to the patient; they are often
absolutely silly; in every case they are the starting-point of a strained concentration of thought which
¹Sometimes called in English compulsion-neurosis.—Tr.

exhausts the patient and to which he yields most unwillingly. Against his will he has to worry and speculate as if it were a matter of
life or death to him. The impulses which he perceives within him may seem to be of an equally childish and meaningless character;
mostly, however, they consist of something terrifying, such as temptations to commit serious crimes, so that the patient not only
repudiates them as alien, but flees from them in horror, and guards himself by prohibitions, precautions, and restrictions against the
possibility of carrying them out. Asa matter of fact he never, literally not even once, carries these impulses into effect; flight and
precautions invariably win. What he does really commit are very harmless, certainly trivial acts—what are termed the obsessive
actions—which are mostly repetitions and ceremonial elaborations of ordinary every-day performances, making these common
necessary actions—going to bed, washing, dressing, going for walks, etc.—into highly laborious tasks of almost insuperable difficulty.
The mor bid ideas, impulses, and actions are not by any means combined in the same proportions in individual types and cases of
the obsessional neurosis; on the contrary, the rule is that one or another of these manifestations dominates the picture and gives the
disease its name; but what is common to all forms of it is unmistakable enough.

This is a mad disease, surely. I don't think the wildest psychiatric phantasy could have in vented anything like it, and if we did not see
it every day with our own eyes we could hardly bring ourselves to believe in it. Now do not imagine that you can do anything for such
a patient by advising him to distract himself, to pay no attention to these silly ideas, and do something sensible instead of his
nonsensical practises. This is what he would like himself; for he is perfectly aware of his condition, he shares your opinion about his
obsessional symptoms, he even volunteers it quite readily. Only he simply cannot help himself; the actions per formed in an
obsessional condition are supported by a kind of energy which probably has no counterpart in normal mental life. Only one thing is
open to him—he can displace and he can exchange; instead of one silly idea he can adopt another of a slightly milder character, from
one precaution or prohibition he can proceed to another, instead of one ceremonial rite he can perform another. He can displace his
sense of compulsion, but he cannot dispel it. This capacity for displacing all the symptoms, involving radical alteration of their original
forms, is a main characteristic of the disease; it is, moreover, striking that in this condition the opposite values (polarities) pervading
mental life appear to be exceptionally sharply differentiated. In addition to compulsions of both positive and negative character,
doubt appears in the intellectual sphere, gradually spreading until it gnaws even at what is usually held to be certain. All these things
combine to bring about an ever-increasing indecisiveness, loss of energy, and curtailment of freedom; and that although the
obsessional neurotic is originally always a person of a very energetic disposition, often highly opinionated, and as a rule intellectually
gifted above the average. He has usually attained to an agreeably high standard of ethical development, is over-conscientious, and
more than usually correct. You may imagine that it is a sufficiently arduous task to find one's bearings in this maze of contradictory
character-traits and morbid manifestations. At the moment our aim is merely to interpret some symptoms of this disease.

Perhaps in view of our previous discussions you would like to know what present-day psychiatry has to offer concerning the
obsessional neurosis; it is but a miserable contribution, however. Psychiatry has given names to the various compulsions, and has
nothing more to say about them. It asserts instead that persons exhibiting these symptoms are degenerate. That is not much
satisfaction to us; it is no more than an estimate of their value, a condemnation instead of an explanation. We are intended, I
suppose, to conclude that deterioration from type would naturally produce all kinds of oddities in people. Now, we do believe that
people who develop such symptoms must be somewhat different in type from other human beings; but we should like to know
whether they are more degenerate than other nervous patients, than hysterical or insane people. The characterization is clearly
again much too general. One may even doubt whether it is justified at all when one learns that such symptoms occur in men and
women of exceptional ability who have left their mark on their generation. Thanks to their own discretion and the untruthfulness of
biographers we usually learn very little of an intimate nature about our exemplary great men; but it does happen occasionally that
one of them is a fanatic about truth like Emile Zola,¹ and then we hear of the
¹E. Toulouse, Emile Zola: Enquete medico-psychologique (Paris, 1896).

many extraordinary obsessive habits from which he suffered throughout life.

Psychiatry has got out of this difficulty by dubbing these people "degineres superieurs." Very well; but psycho-analysis has shown
that these extraordinary obsessional symptoms can be removed permanently, like the symptoms of other diseases, and as in other
people who are not degenerate. I myself have frequently succeeded in doing so.

I shall only give you two examples of analysis of obsessional symptoms; one is an old one, but I have never found a better; and one is
a recent one. I shall limit myself to these two because an account of this kind must be very explicit and go into great detail.

A lady of nearly thirty years of age suffered from very severe obsessional symptoms. I might perhaps have been able to help her if my
work had not been destroyed by the caprice of fate—perhaps I shall tell you about it later. In the course of a day she would per form
the following peculiar obsessive act, among others, several times over. She would run out of her room into the adjoining one, there
take up a certain position at the table in the center of the room, ring for her maid, give her a trivial order or send her away without,
and then run back again. There was certainly nothing very dreadful about this, but it might well arouse curiosity. The explanation
presented itself in the simplest and most unexceptionable manner, without any assistance on the part of the analyst. I cannot
imagine how I could even have suspected the meaning of this obsession or could possibly have suggested an interpretation for it.
Every time I had asked the patient, "Why do you do this? What is the meaning of it?" she had answered, "I don't know." But one day,
after I had succeeded in overcoming a great hesitation on her part, involving a matter of principle, she suddenly did know, for she
related the history of the obsessive act. More than ten years previously she had married a man very much older than herself, who
had proved impotent on the wedding-night. Innumerable times on that night he had run out of his room, into hers in order to make
the attempt, but had failed every time. In the morning he had said angrily: "It's enough to disgrace one in the eyes of the maid who
does the beds," and seizing a bottle of red ink which happened to be at hand he poured it on the sheet, but not exactly in the place
where such a mark might have been. At first I did not understand what this recollection could have to do with the obsessive act in
question; for I could see no similarity between the two situations, except in the running from one room into the other, and perhaps
also in the appearance of the servant on the scene. The patient then led me to the table in the adjoining room, where I found a great
mark on the table-cover. She explained further that she stood by the table in such a way that when the maid came in she could not
miss seeing this mark. After this, there could no longer be any doubt about the connection between the current obsessive act and
the scene of the wedding night, though there was still a great deal to learn about it.

It was clear, first of all, that the patient identified herself with her husband; in imitating his running from one room into another she
acted his part. To keep up the similarity we must assume that she has substituted the table and table-cover for the bed and sheet.
This might seem too arbitrary; but then we have not studied dream-symbolism in vain. In dreams a table is very often found to
represent a bed. Bed and board together mean marriage, so that the one easily stands for the other.

All this would be proof enough that the obsessive act is full of meaning; it seems to be a representation, a repetition of that all-
important scene. But we are not bound to stop at this semblance; if we investigate more closely the relation between the two
situations we shall probably find out something more, the purpose of the obsessive act. The kernel of it evidently lies in the calling of
the maid, to whom she displays the mark, in contrast to her husband's words: "It's enough to disgrace one before the servant." In
this way he, whose part she is playing, is not ashamed before the servant, the stain is where it ought to be. We see therefore that she
has not simply repeated the scene, she has continued it and corrected it, transformed it into what it ought to have been. This implies
something else, too, a correction of the circumstance which made that night so distressing, and which made the red ink necessary:
namely, the husband's impotence. The obsessive act thus says: "No, it is not true, he was not disgraced before the servant, he was
not impotent." As in a dream she represents this wish as fulfilled, in a current obsessive act, which serves the purpose of restoring
her husband's credit after that unfortunate incident.

Everything else which I could tell you about this lady fits in with this, or, more correctly stated, everything else that we know about
her points to this interpretation of the obsessive act, in itself so incomprehensible. She had been separated from her husband for
years and was trying to make up her mind to divorce him legally. But there would have been no prospect of being free from him in
her mind; she forced herself to be true to him. She withdrew from the world and from everyone so that she might not be tempted,
and in her phantasies she excused and idealized him. The deepest secret of her illness was that it enabled her to shield him from
malicious gossip, to justify her separation from him, and to make a comfortable existence apart from her possible for him. The
analysis of a harmless obsessive act thus leads straight to the inmost core of the patient's disease, and at the same time betrays a
great deal of the secret of the obsessional neurosis in general. I am quite willing that you should spend some time over this example,
for it unites conditions which cannot reasonably be expected in all cases. The interpretation of the symptom was discovered by the
patient herself in a flash, without guidance or interference from the analyst, and it had arisen in connection with an event which did
not belong, as it commonly does, to a forgotten period in childhood, but which had occurred in the patient's adult life and was clear
in her memory. All those objections which critics habitually raise against our interpretations of symptoms are quite out of place here.
To be sure, we cannot always be so fortunate.

And one thing more! Has it not struck you that this innocent obsessive act leads directly to this lady's most private affairs? A woman
can hardly have anything more intimate to relate than the story of her wedding-night; and is it by chance and without special
significance that we are led straight to the innermost secrets of her sexual life? It might certainly be due to the choice I made of this
example. Let us not decide this point too quickly; but let us turn to the second example, which is of a totally different nature, and
belongs to a very common type, that of rituals preparatory to sleep.

A well-grown clever girl of 19, the only child of her parents, superior to them in education and intellectual activity, was a wild, high-
spirited child, but of late years had become very nervous without any apparent cause. She was very irritable, particularly with her
mother, was discontented and depressed, inclined to indecision and doubt, finally confessing that she could no longer walk alone
through squares and wide streets. We will not go very closely into her complicated condition, which requires at least two diagnoses:
agoraphobia and obsessional neurosis; but will turn our attention to the ritual elaborated by this young girl preparatory to going to
bed, as a result of which she caused her parents great distress. In a certain sense, every normal person may be said to carry out a
ritual before going to sleep, or at least, he requires certain conditions without which he is hindered in going to sleep; the transition
from waking life to sleep has been made into a regular formula which is repeated every night in the same manner. But everything
that a healthy person requires as a condition of sleep can be rationally explained, and if the external circumstances make any
alteration necessary he adapts himself easily to it without waste of time. The morbid ritual on the other hand is inexorable, it will be
maintained at the greatest sacrifices; it is disguised, too, under rational motives and appears superficially to differ from the normal
only in a certain exaggerated carefulness of execution. On a closer examination, however, it is clear that the dis guise is insufficient,
that the ritual includes observances which go far beyond what reason can justify and even some which directly contravene this. As
the motive of her nightly precautions, our patient declares that she must have silence at night and must exclude all possibility of
noise. She does two things for this purpose; she stops the large clock in her room and removes all other clocks out of the room,
including even the tiny wrist-watch on her bedtable. Flower-pots and vases are placed carefully together on the writing-table, so that
they cannot fall down in the night and break, and so disturb her sleep. She knows that these precautions have only an illusory
justification in the demand for quiet; the ticking of the little watch could not be heard, even if it lay on the table by the bed; and we
all know that the regular ticking of a pendulum-clock never disturbs sleep, but is more likely to induce it. She also admits that her
fear that the flower-pots and vases, if left in their places at night, might fall down of themselves and break is utterly improbable. For
some other practices in her ritual this insistence upon silence as a motive is dropped; indeed, by ordaining that the door between
her bedroom and that of her parents shall remain half-open (a condition which she ensures by placing various objects in the
doorway) she seems, on the contrary, to open the way to sources of noise. The most important observances are concerned with the
bed itself, however. The bolster at the head of the bed must not touch the back of the wooden bedstead. The pillow must lie across
the bolster exactly in a diagonal position and in no other; she then places her head exactly in the middle of this diamond, lengthways.
The eiderdown must be shaken before she puts it over her, so that all the feathers sink to the foot-end; she never fails, however, to
press this out and redistribute them all over it again.

I will pass over other trivial details of her ritual; they would teach us nothing new and lead us too far from our purpose. Do not
suppose, though, that all this is carried out with perfect smoothness. Everything is accompanied by the anxiety that it has not all
been done properly; it must be tested and repeated; her doubts fix first upon one, then another, of the precautions; and the result is
that one or two hours elapse before the girl herself can sleep, or lets the intimidated parents sleep.

The analysis of these torments did not proceed so simply as that of the former patient's obsessive act. I had to offer hints and
suggestions of its interpretation which were invariably received by her with a positive denial or with scornful doubt. After this first
reaction of rejection, however, there followed a period in which she herself took up the possibilities suggested to her, noted the
associations they aroused, produced memories, and established connections until she herself had accepted all the interpretations in
working them out for herself. In proportion as she did this she began to relax the performance of her obsessive pre cautions and
before the end of the treatment she had given up the whole ritual. I must also tell you that analytic work, as we conduct it nowadays,
definitely excludes any uninterrupted concentration on a single symptom until its meaning becomes fully clear. It is necessary, on the
contrary, to abandon a given theme again and again, in the assurance that one will come upon it anew in another context. The
interpretation of the symptom, which I am now going to tell you, is therefore a synthesis of the results which, amid the interruptions
of work on other points, took weeks and months to procure.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, 558d-562c

It would be possible to obtain much more out of the analysis of this ritual by bringing it into its place in connection with the patient's
other symptoms. But that is not our purpose at the moment. You must be content with a reference to an erotic attachment to the
father, originating very early in childhood, which had enslaved this girl. It was perhaps for this reason that she was so unfriendly
towards her mother. Also we cannot overlook the fact that the analysis of this symptom has again led to the patient's sexual life. The
more insight we gain into the meaning and purpose of neurotic symptoms, the less surprising will this seem.

From two selected examples I have now shown you that neurotic symptoms have meaning, like errors and like dreams, and that they
are closely connected with the events of the patient's life. Can I expect you to believe this exceptionally significant statement on the
strength of two examples? No. But can you expect me to go on quoting examples to you until you declare yourselves convinced?
Again, no; for in view of the exhaustive treatment given to each individual case I should have to devote five hours a week for a whole
term to the consideration of this one point in the theory of the neuroses. I will content myself therefore with the samples given, as
evidence of my statement; and will refer you for more to the literature on the subject, to the classical interpretation of symptoms in
Breuer's first case (hysteria), to the striking elucidations of very obscure symptoms in dementia praecox, so called, made by &. G.
Jung at a time when this investigator was a mere psycho-analyst and did not yet aspire to be a prophet, and to all the subsequent
contributions with which our periodicals have been filled since then. Precisely this type of investigation is plentiful. Analysis,
interpretation, and translation of neurotic symptoms has proved so attractive to psycho-analysts that in comparison they have
temporarily neglected the other problems of the neuroses.

Any one of you who makes the necessary effort to look up this question will certainly be Strongly impressed by the wealth of
evidential material. But he will also meet with a difficulty. The meaning of a symptom lies, as we have seen, in its connection with the
life of the patient. The more individually the symptom has been formed, the more clearly may we expect to establish this connection.
Then the task resolves itself specifically into a discovery, for every nonsensical idea and every useless action, of the past situation in
which the idea was justified and the action served a useful purpose. The obsessive act of the patient who ran to the table and rang
for the maid is a perfect model of this kind of symptom. But symptoms of quite a different type are very frequently seen. They are
what we call typical symptoms of a disease, in each case they are practically identical, the individual differences in them vanish or at
least fade away, so that it is difficult to connect them with the patient's life or to relate them to special situations in his past. Let us
consider the obsessional neurosis again. The second patient's ceremonies preparatory to sleep are in many ways quite typical,
although showing enough individual features as well to make an "historical" interpretation, so to speak, possible. But all obsessional
patients are given to repetitions, to isolating certain of their actions and to rhythmic performances. Most of them wash too much.
Those patients who suffer from agoraphobia (topophobia, fear of space), no longer reckoned as an obsessional neurosis but now
classified as anxiety-hysteria, reproduce the same features of the pathological picture often with fatiguing monotony. They fear
enclosed spaces, wide, open squares, long stretches of road, and avenues; they feel protected if accompanied, or if a vehicle drives
behind them, and so on. Nevertheless, on this groundwork of similarity the various patients construct individual conditions of their
own, moods, one might call them, which directly contrast with other cases. One fears narrow streets only, another wide streets only,
one can walk only when few people are about, others only when surrounded with people. Similarly in hysteria, beside the wealth of
individual features there are always plenty of common typical symptoms which appear to resist an easy interpretation on historical
lines. Do not let us for get that it is these typical symptoms which enable us to take our bearings in forming a diagnosis. Supposing
we do trace back a typical symptom in a case of hysteria to an experience or to a chain of similar experiences (for instance, an
hysterical vomiting to a series of impressions of a disgusting nature), it will be confusing to discover in another case of vomiting an
entirely dissimilar series of apparently causative experiences. It almost looks as though hysterical patients must vomit, for some
unknown reason, and as though the historical factors revealed by analysis were but pretexts, seized upon by an inner necessity, when
opportunity offered, to serve its purpose.

This brings us to the discouraging conclusion that, although individual forms of neurotic symptoms can certainly be satisfactorily
explained by their relation to the patient's experiences, yet our science fails us for the far more frequent typical symptoms in the
same cases. In addition to this, I have not nearly explained to you all the difficulties that arise during a resolute pursuit of the
historical meaning of a symptom. Nor shall I do so; for although my intention is to conceal nothing from you and to gloss over
nothing, I do not need to confuse you and stupefy you at the outset of our studies together. It is true that our under standing of
symptom-interpretation has only just begun, but we will hold fast to the knowledge gained and proceed to overcome step by step
the difficulties of the unknown. I will try to cheer you with the thought that it is hardly possible to presume a fundamental difference
between the one kind of symptom and the other. If the individual form of symptom is so unmistakably connected with the patient's
experiences, it is possible that the typical symptom relates to an experience which is itself typical and common to all humanity. Other
regularly recurring features of a neurosis, such as the repetition and doubt of the obsessional neurosis, may be universal reactions
which the patient is compelled to exaggerate by the nature of the morbid change. In short, there is no reason to give up hastily in
despair; let us see what more we can find out.

There is a very similar difficulty met with in the theory of dreams, one which I could not deal with in the course of our previous
discussions of dreams. The manifest content of dreams is multifarious and highly differentiated individually, and we have shown
exhaustively what can be obtained by analysis from this content. But there are also dreams which may in the same way be called
typical and occur in everybody, dreams with an identical content, which present the same difficulties to analysis. These are the
dreams of falling, flying, floating, swimming, of being hindered, of being naked, and certain other anxiety-dreams; which yield first
this, then that, interpretation, according to the person concerned, without any explanation of their monotonous and typical
recurrence. But we notice that in these dreams also the common groundwork is embroidered with additions of an individually
varying character. Most probably they too will prove to fit in with other knowledge about the dream-life, gained from a study of
other kinds of dreams—not by any forcible twist, but by a gradual widening of our comprehension of these things.

                                                          EIGHTEENTH LECTURE

Fixation upon Traumas: The Unconscious I said last time that we would take, as a starting-point for further work, the knowledge we
have gained already, and not the doubts which it has roused in us. We have not yet even be gun to discuss two of the most
interesting conclusions arising from the analysis of the two examples.

First: both the patients give the impression that they are fixed to a particular point in their past, that they do not know how to
release themselves from it, and are consequently alienated from both present and future. They are marooned in their illness, as it
were; just as in former times people used to withdraw to the cloister to live out their unhappy fate there. In the case of the first
patient, it was the marriage to the husband, which in reality had long ago come to an end, that had settled this doom upon her. Her
symptoms enabled her to continue her relationship with him; we could perceive in them the voices which pleaded for him, excused
him, exalted him, lamented his loss. Although she is young and could attract other men, she has seized upon every possible real and
imaginary (magical) precaution that will preserve her fidelity to him. She will not meet strangers, she neglects her appearance;
moreover, she cannot readily rise from any chair which she sits upon, and she refuses to sign her name and can give no presents,
because no one must have anything which is hers.

With the second patient, the young girl, it is the erotic attachment to the father established in the years before puberty that plays
this part in her life. She also has herself perceived that she cannot marry as long as she is so ill. We may suspect that she became so
ill in order to be unable to marry and so to remain with her father.

We cannot avoid asking the question how, by what means and impelled by what motives, anyone can take up such an extraordinary
and unprofitable attitude towards life. Provided, that is, that this attitude is a universal character of neurosis and is not a special
peculiarity of these two patients. As a matter of fact, this is so; it is a universal trait common to every neurosis, and one of great
practical significance. Breuer's first hysterical patient was fixated, in the same way, to the time when her father was seriously ill and
she nursed him. In spite of her recovery, she has remained to some extent cut off from life since that time; for although she has
remained healthy and active, she did not take up the normal career of a woman. In every one of our patients we learn through
analysis that the symptoms and their effects have set the sufferer back into some past period of his life. In the majority of cases it is
actually a very early phase of the life-history which has been thus selected, a period in childhood, even, absurd as it may sound, the
period of existence as a suckling infant.

The closest analogy to this behaviour in our nervous patients is provided by the forms of illness recently made so common by the
war— the so-called traumatic neuroses. Of course similar cases have occurred before the war, after railway accidents and other
terrifying experiences involving danger to life. The traumatic neuroses are not fundamentally the same as those which occur
spontaneously, which we investigate analytically and are accustomed to treat; neither have we been successful so far in correlating
them with our views on other subjects; later on I hope to show you where this limitation lies. Yet there is a complete agreement
between them on one point which may be emphasized. The traumatic neuroses demonstrate very clearly that a fixation to the
moment of the traumatic occurrence lies at their root. These patients regularly produce the traumatic situation in their dreams; in
cases showing attacks of an hysterical type in which analysis is possible, it appears that the attack constitutes a complete
reproduction of this situation. It is as though these persons had not yet been able to deal adequately with the situation, as if this task
were still actually before them unaccomplished. We take this attitude of theirs in all seriousness; it points the way to what we may
call an economic conception of the mental processes. The term traumatic has actually no other meaning but this economic one. An
experience which we call traumatic is one which within a very short space of time subjects the mind to such a very high increase of
stimulation that assimilation or elaboration of it can no longer be effected by normal means, so that lasting disturbances must result
in the distribution of the available energy in the mind.

This analogy tempts us also to classify as traumatic those experiences to which our nervous patients seem to be fixated. In this way
we should be provided with a simple condition for a neurotic illness; it would be incomparable to a traumatic illness and would result
from an incapacity to deal with an overpowering affective experience. Indeed, the first formula in which Breuer and I, in 1893-95,
reduced our new observations to a theory was expressed very similarly. A case like that of the first patient described, the young
woman separated from her husband, fits very well into this description; she had not been able to get over the impracticability of her
marriage and was still attached to her trauma. But the second case of the young girl who was tied to her father shows us at once that
the formula is not comprehensive enough. On the one hand, an infantile adoration of her father by a little girl is such a common
experience and so frequently grown out of that the term traumatic would lose all its meaning if applied to it; on the other hand, the
history of the case shows that this first erotic fixation was gone through by the patient quite harmlessly at the time, to all
appearances, and only several years later came to expression in the obsessional neurosis. So we see that there are complications
ahead, a considerable variety and number of determining factors in neurosis; but we divine that the traumatic view will not
necessarily be abandoned as false, and that it will fit in and have to be coordinated properly elsewhere.

Here again we must leave the path we have been following. At the moment it will take us no further, and we have much more to
learn before we can find a satisfactory continuation of it. But before leaving the subject of fixation to traumas it should be noted that
it is a phenomenon manifested extensively outside the neuroses; every neurosis contains such a fixation, but not every fixation leads
to a neurosis, or is necessarily combined with a neurosis, or arises in the course of a neurosis. Grief is a prototype and perfect
example of an affective fixation upon something that is past, and, like the neuroses, it also involves a state of complete alienation
from the present and the future. But even the lay public distinguishes clearly between grief and neurosis. On the other hand, there
are neuroses which may be described as morbid forms of grief.
It does also happen that persons may be brought to a complete standstill in life by a traumatic experience which has shaken the
whole structure of their lives to the foundations, so that they give up all interest in the present and the future, and live permanently
absorbed in their retrospections; but these unhappy persons do not necessarily become neurotic. Therefore this single feature must
not be overestimated as a characteristic of neurosis, however invariable and significant it may be otherwise.

Now let us turn to the second conclusion to be drawn from our analyses; it is one upon which we shall not need to impose any
subsequent limitation. With the first patient we have heard of the senseless obsessive act she per formed and of the intimate
memories she re called in connection with it; we also considered the relation between the two, and deduced the purpose of the
obsessive act from its connection with the memory. But there is one factor which we have entirely neglected, and yet it is one which
deserves our fullest attention. As long as the patient continued this performance she did not know that it was in any way connected
with the previous experience; the connection between the two things: was hidden; she could quite truly answer that she did not
know what impulse led her to do it. Then it happened suddenly that, under the influence of the treatment, she found this connection
and was able to tell it. But even then she knew nothing of the purpose she had in performing the action, the purpose that was to
correct a painful event of the past and to raise the husband she loved in her own estimation. It took a long time and much effort for
her to grasp, and admit to me, that such a motive as this alone could have been the driving force behind the obsessive act.

The connection with the scene on the morning after the unhappy bridal-night, and the patient's own tender feeling for her husband,
together, make up what we have called the meaning of the obsessive act. But both sides of this meaning were hidden from her, she
understood neither the whence nor the whither of her act, as long as she carried it on. Mental processes had been at work in her,
therefore, of which the obsessive act was the effect; she was aware in a normal manner of their effect; but nothing of the mental
antecedents of this effect had come to the knowledge of her consciousness. She was behaving exactly like a subject under hypnotism
whom Bernheim had ordered to open an umbrella in the ward five minutes after he awoke, but who had no idea why he was doing
it. This is the kind of occurrence we have in mind when we speak of the existence of unconscious mental processes; we may
challenge anyone in the world to give a more correctly scientific explanation of this matter, and will then gladly withdraw our
inference that unconscious mental processes exist. Until they do, however, we will adhere to this inference and, when anyone
objects that in a scientific sense the unconscious has no reality, that it is a mere makeshift, une faqon de parler, we, must resign
ourselves with a shrug to rejecting his statement as incomprehensible. Something unreal, which can nevertheless produce something
so real and palpable as an obsessive action!

In the second patient fundamentally the same thing is found. She has instituted a rule that the bolster must not touch the back of the
bedstead, and she had to carry out this rule, but she does not know whence it comes, what it means, or to what it owes its strength.
Whether she regards it indifferently, or struggles against it, or rages against it, or determines to overcome it, matters not; it will be
followed. It must be followed; in-vain she asks herself why. It is undeniable that these symptoms of the obsessional neurosis, these
ideas and these impulses which arise no man knows where and which oppose such a powerful resistance against all the influences to
which an otherwise nor mal mental life is susceptible, give the impression, even, to the patients themselves, of being all-powerful
visitants from another world, immortal beings mingling in the whirlpool of mortal things. In these symptoms lies the clearest
indication of a special sphere of mental activity cut off from all the rest. They show the way unmistakably to conviction on the
question of the unconscious in the mind; and for that very reason clinical psychiatry, which only recognizes a psychology of
consciousness, can do nothing with these symptoms except to stigmatize them as signs of a special kind of de generation. Naturally,
the obsessive idea and impulses are not themselves unconscious, any more that is the performance of the obsessive acts. They
would not have become symptoms if they had not penetrated into consciousness. But the mental antecedents of them disclosed by
analysis, the connections into which they fit after interpretation, are unconscious, at least until the time when we make the patient
conscious of them by the work of the analysis.

Consider now, in addition, that the facts established in these two cases are confirmed in every symptom of every neurotic disease;
that always and everywhere the meaning of the symptoms is unknown to the sufferer; that analysis invariably shows that these
symptoms are derived from unconscious mental processes which can, however, under various favourable conditions, become
conscious. You will then understand that we cannot dispense with the unconscious part of the mind in psycho-analysis, and that we
are accustomed to deal with it as with something actual and tangible. Perhaps you will also be able to realize how unfitted all those
who only know the unconscious as a phrase, who have never analysed, never interpreted dreams, or translated neurotic symptoms
into their meaning and intention, are to form an opinion on this matter. I will repeat the substance of it again in order to impress it
upon you: The fact that it is possible to find meaning in neurotic symptoms by means of analytic interpretation is an irrefutable proof
of the existence—or, if you prefer it, of the necessity for assuming the existence—of unconscious mental processes.
54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 559d-560a

This brings us to the discouraging conclusion that, although individual forms of neurotic symptoms can certainly be satisfactorily
explained by their relation to the patient's experiences, yet our science fails us for the far more frequent typical symptoms in the
same cases. In addition to this, I have not nearly explained to you all the difficulties that arise during a resolute pursuit of the
historical meaning of a symptom. Nor shall I do so; for although my intention is to conceal nothing from you and to gloss over
nothing, I do not need to confuse you and stupefy you at the outset of our studies together. It is true that our under standing of
symptom-interpretation has only just begun, but we will hold fast to the knowledge gained and proceed to overcome step by step
the difficulties of the unknown. I will try to cheer you with the thought that it is hardly possible to presume a fundamental difference
between the one kind of symptom and the other. If the individual form of symptom is so unmistakably connected with the patient's
experiences, it is possible that the typical symptom relates to an experience which is itself typical and common to all humanity. Other
regularly recurring features of a neurosis, such as the repetition and doubt of the obsessional neurosis, may be universal reactions
which the patient is compelled to exaggerate by the nature of the morbid change. In short, there is no reason to give up hastily in
despair; let us see what more we can find out.

There is a very similar difficulty met with in the theory of dreams, one which I could not deal with in the course of our previous
discussions of dreams. The manifest content of dreams is multifarious and highly differentiated individually, and we have shown
exhaustively what can be obtained by analysis from this content. But there are also dreams which may in the same way be called
typical and occur in everybody, dreams with an identical content, which present the same difficulties to analysis. These are the
dreams of falling, flying, floating, swimming, of being hindered, of being naked, and certain other anxiety-dreams; which yield first
this, then that, interpretation, according to the person concerned, without any explanation of their monotonous and typical
recurrence. But we notice that in these dreams also the common groundwork is embroidered with additions of an individually
varying character. Most probably they too will prove to fit in with other knowledge about the dream-life, gained from a study of
other kinds of dreams—not by any forcible twist, but by a gradual widening of our comprehension of these things.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 562b-c

In the second patient fundamentally the same thing is found. She has instituted a rule that the bolster must not touch the back of the
bedstead, and she had to carry out this rule, but she does not know whence it comes, what it means, or to what it owes its strength.
Whether she regards it indifferently, or struggles against it, or rages against it, or determines to overcome it, matters not; it will be
followed. It must be followed; in-vain she asks herself why. It is undeniable that these symptoms of the obsessional neurosis, these
ideas and these impulses which arise no man knows where and which oppose such a powerful resistance against all the influences to
which an otherwise nor mal mental life is susceptible, give the impression, even, to the patients themselves, of being all-powerful
visitants from another world, immortal beings mingling in the whirlpool of mortal things. In these symptoms lies the clearest
indication of a special sphere of mental activity cut off from all the rest. They show the way unmistakably to conviction on the
question of the unconscious in the mind; and for that very reason clinical psychiatry, which only recognizes a psychology of
consciousness, can do nothing with these symptoms except to stigmatize them as signs of a special kind of de generation. Naturally,
the obsessive idea and impulses are not themselves unconscious, any more that is the performance of the obsessive acts. They
would not have become symptoms if they had not penetrated into consciousness. But the mental antecedents of them disclosed by
analysis, the connections into which they fit after interpretation, are unconscious, at least until the time when we make the patient
conscious of them by the work of the analysis.

Consider now, in addition, that the facts established in these two cases are confirmed in every symptom of every neurotic disease;
that always and everywhere the meaning of the symptoms is unknown to the sufferer; that analysis invariably shows that these
symptoms are derived from unconscious mental processes which can, however, under various favourable conditions, become
conscious. You will then understand that we cannot dispense with the unconscious part of the mind in psycho-analysis, and that we
are accustomed to deal with it as with something actual and tangible. Perhaps you will also be able to realize how unfitted all those
who only know the unconscious as a phrase, who have never analysed, never interpreted dreams, or translated neurotic symptoms
into their meaning and intention, are to form an opinion on this matter. I will repeat the substance of it again in order to impress it
upon you: The fact that it is possible to find meaning in neurotic symptoms by means of analytic interpretation is an irrefutable proof
of the existence—or, if you prefer it, of the necessity for assuming the existence—of unconscious mental processes.
54 FREUD: General Introduction, 568a-569c

Besides this, you must take into account that all accidental occurrences arising during the treatment are made use of by the patient
to interfere with it, anything which could distract him or deter him from it, every hostile expression of opinion from anyone in his
circle whom he can regard as an authority, any chance organic illness or one complicating the neurosis; indeed, he even converts
every improvement in his condition into a motive for slackening his efforts. Then you will have obtained an approximate, though still
incomplete, picture of the forms and the measures taken by the resistances which must be met and overcome in the course of every
analysis. I have given such a detailed consideration to this point because I am about to inform you that our dynamic conception of
the neuroses is founded upon this experience of ours of the resistances that neurotic patients set up against the cure of their
symptoms. Breuer and I both originally practiced psycho-therapy by the hypnotic method. Breuer's first patient was treated
throughout in a state of hypnotic suggestibility; at first I followed his example. I admit that at that time my work went forward more
easily and agreeably and also took much less time: but the results were capricious and not permanent; therefore I finally gave up
hypnotism.

And then I understood that no comprehension of the dynamics of these affections was possible as long as hypnosis was employed. In
this condition the very existence of resistances is concealed from the physician's observation. Hypnosis drives back the resistances
and frees a certain field for the work of the analysis, but dams them up at the boundaries of this field so that they are
insurmountable; it is similar in effect to the doubt of the obsessional neurosis. Therefore I may say that true psycho analysis only
began when the help of hypnosis was discarded.

If it is a matter of such importance to establish these resistances then surely it would be wise to allow caution and doubt full play, in
case we have been too ready with our assumption that they exist. Perhaps cases of neurosis may be found in which the associations
really fail for other reasons, perhaps the arguments against our theories really deserve serious attention, and we may be wrong in so
conveniently disposing of the patient's intellectual objections by stigmatizing them as resistance. Well, I can only assure you that our
judgment in this matter has not been formed hastily; we have had opportunity to observe these critical patients both before the
resistance comes to the surface and after it disappears. In the course of the treatment the resistance varies in intensity continually; it
always increases as a new topic is approached, it is at its height during the work upon it, and dies down again when this theme has
been dealt with. Unless certain technical errors have been committed, we never have to meet the full measure of resistance, of
which any patient is capable, at once. Thus we could definitely ascertain that the same man would take up and then abandon his
critical objections over and over again in the course of the analysis. Whenever we are on the point of bringing to his consciousness
some piece of unconscious material which is particularly painful to him, then he is critical in the extreme; even though he may have
previously understood and accepted a great deal, yet now all these gains seem to be obliterated; in his struggles to oppose at all
costs he can behave just as though he were mentally deficient, a form of emotional stupidity. If he can be successfully helped to
overcome this new resistance he regains his insight and comprehension. His critical faculty is not functioning independently, and
therefore is not to be respected as if it were; it is merely a maid-of-all-work for his affective attitudes and is directed by his resistance.
When he dis likes anything he can defend himself against it most ingeniously; but when anything suits his book he can be credulous
enough. We are perhaps all much the same; a person being analysed shows this dependence of the intellect upon the affective life so
clearly because in the analysis he is so hard-pressed.

In what way can we now account for this fact observed, that the patient struggles so energetically against the relief of his symptoms
and the restoration of his mental processes to normal functioning? We say that we have come upon the traces of powerful forces at
work here opposing any change in the condition; they must be the same forces that originally induced the condition. In the
formation of symptoms some process must have been gone through, which our experience in dispersing them makes us able to
reconstruct. As we already know from Breuer's observations, it follows from the existence of a symptom that some mental process
has not been carried through to an end in a normal manner so that it could become conscious; the symptom is a substitute for that
which has not come through. Now we know where to place the forces which we suspect to be at work. A vehement effort must have
been exercised to prevent the mental process in question from penetrating into consciousness and as a result it has remained
unconscious; being unconscious it had the power to construct a symptom. The same vehement effort is again at work during analytic
treatment, opposing the attempt to bring the unconscious into consciousness. This we perceive in the form of resistances. The
pathogenic process which is demonstrated by the resistances we call Repression.

It will now be necessary to make our conception of this process of repression more precise. It is the essential preliminary condition
for the development of symptoms, but it is also something else, a thing to which we have no parallel. Let us take as a model an
impulse, a mental process seeking to convert itself into action: we know that it can suffer rejection, by virtue of what we call
repudiation or condemnation; whereupon the energy at its disposal is withdrawn, it becomes powerless, but it can continue to exist
as a memory. The whole process of decision on the point takes place with the full cognizance of the ego. It is very different when we
imagine the same impulse subject to repression: it would then retain its energy and no memory of it would be left behind; the
process of repression, too, would be accomplished without the cognizance of the ego. This comparison therefore brings us no nearer
to the nature of repression.

I will expound to you those theoretical conceptions which alone have proved useful in giving greater definiteness to the term
repression. For this purpose it is first necessary that we should proceed from the purely descriptive meaning of the word
unconscious to its systematic meaning; that is, we resolve to think of the consciousness or unconsciousness of a mental process as
merely one of its qualities and not necessarily definitive. Suppose that a process of this kind has remained unconscious, its being
withheld from consciousness may be merely a sign of the fate it has undergone, not necessarily the fate itself. Let us suppose, in
order to gain a more concrete notion of this fate, that every mental process—there is one exception, which I will go into later—first
exists in an unconscious state or phase, and only develops out of this into a conscious phase, much as a photograph is first a negative
and then becomes a picture through the printing of the positive. But not every negative is made into a positive, and it is just as little
necessary that every unconscious mental process should convert itself into a conscious one. It may be best expressed as follows:
Each single process belongs in the first place to the unconscious psychical system; from this system it can under certain conditions
proceed further into the conscious system.

The crudest conception of these systems is the one we shall find most convenient, a spatial one. The unconscious system may
therefore be compared to a large ante-room, in which the various mental excitations are crowding upon one another, like individual
beings. Ad joining this is a second, smaller apartment, a sort of reception-room, in which consciousness resides. But on the threshold
between the two there stands a personage with the office of door-keeper, who examines the various mental excitations, censors
them, and denies them admittance to the reception-room when he disapproves of them. You will see at once that it does not make
much difference whether the door-keeper turns any one impulse back at the threshold, or drives it out again once it has entered the
reception-room; that is merely a matter of the degree of his vigilance and promptness in recognition. Now this metaphor may be
employed to widen our terminology. The excitations in the unconscious, in the ante-chamber, are not visible to consciousness, which
is of course in the other room, so to begin with they remain unconscious. When they have pressed forward to the threshold and
been turned back by the door-keeper, they are incapable of becoming conscious; we call them then repressed. But even those
excitations which are allowed over the threshold do not necessarily become conscious; they can only become so if they succeed in
attracting the eye of consciousness. This second chamber therefore may be suitably called the preconscious system. In this way the
process of becoming conscious retains its purely descriptive sense. Being repressed, when applied to any single impulse, means
being unable to pass out of the unconscious system because of the door-keeper's refusal of admittance into the preconscious. The
door-keeper is what we have learnt to know as resistance in our attempts in analytic treatment to loosen the repressions.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, 571d-572c

It is certainly possible to make all kinds of objections to the proposition that neurotic symptoms are substitutes for sexual
gratifications. I will discuss two of them today. If any one of you has himself undertaken the analysis of a large number of neurotics,
he will perhaps shake his head and say: "In certain cases this. is not at all applicable, in them the symptoms seem rather to contain
the opposite purpose, of excluding or of discontinuing sexual gratification." I shall not dispute your interpretation. In psycho-analysis
things are often a good deal more complicated than we could wish: if they had been simpler psycho-analysis would perhaps not have
been required to bring them to light. Certain features of the ritual of our second patient are distinctly recognizable as being of this
ascetic character, inimical to sexual satisfaction; e.g., her removing the clocks for the magic purpose of preventing erections at night,
or her trying to prevent the falling and breaking of vessels, which amounts to a protection of her virginity. In other cases of
ceremonials on going to bed which I have analysed this negative character was far more marked; the whole ritual could consist of
defensive regulations against sexual recollections and temptations. But we have long ago learnt from psycho analysis that opposites
do not constitute a contradiction. We might extend our proposition and say that the purpose of the symptom is either a sexual
gratification or a defence against it; in hysteria the positive, wish-fulfilling character predominates on the whole, and in the
obsessional neurosis the negative ascetic char acter. The symptoms can serve the purpose both of sexual gratification and of its
opposite so well because this double-sidedness, or polarity, has a most suitable foundation in one element of their mechanism which
we have not yet had an opportunity to mention. They are in fact, as we shall see, the effects of compromises between two opposed
tendencies, acting on one another; they represent both that which is re pressed, and also that which has effected the repression and
has co-operated in bringing them about. The representation of either one or another of these two factors may predominate in the
symptom, but it happens very rarely that one of them is absent altogether. In hysteria a collaboration of the two tendencies in one
symptom is usually achieved. In the obsessional neurosis the two parts are often distinct: the symptom is then a double one and
consists of two successive actions which cancel each other.
It will not be so easy to dispose of a second difficulty. When you consider a whole series of symptom-interpretations your first
opinion would probably be that the conception of a sexual substitute-gratification has to be stretched to its widest limits in order to
include them. You will not neglect to point out that these symptoms offer nothing real in the way of gratification, that often enough
they are confined to re-animating a sensation, or to enacting a phantasy arising from some sexual complex. Further, that the
ostensible sexual gratification is very often of an infantile and unworthy character, perhaps approximating to a masturbatory act, or is
reminiscent of dirty habits which long ago in childhood had been forbidden and abandoned. And further still, you will express your
astonishment that anyone should reckon among sexual gratifications those which can only be described as gratifications of cruel or
horrible appetites, or which may be termed unnatural. Indeed, we shall come to no agreement on these latter points until we have
submitted human sexuality to a thorough investigation and have thus established what we are justified in calling sexual.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, 593b-594c

Over and over again when psycho-analysis has regarded something happening in the mind as an expression of the sexual instincts,
indignant protests have been raised to the effect that other instincts and other interests exist in mental life besides the sexual, that
one should not derive everything from sexuality, and so on. Well, it is a real pleasure for once to be in agreement with one's
opponents. Psycho-analysis has never forgotten that non-sexual instincts also exist; it has been built upon a sharp distinction
between sexual instincts and ego instincts; and in the face of all opposition it has insisted, not that they arise from sexuality, but that
the neuroses owe their origin to a conflict between ego and sexuality. It has no conceivable motive in denying the existence or the

significance of the ego-instincts while it investigates the part played by sexual instincts in disease and in life generally. Only, psycho
analysis has been destined to concern itself first and foremost with the sexual instincts, because in the transference neuroses these
are the most accessible to investigation, and because it was obliged to study what others had neglected.

It is not any more accurate to say that psycho-analysis has not occupied itself at all with the non-sexual side of the personality. The
very distinction between the ego and sexuality has shown us with particular clearness that the ego-instincts also undergo an
important development which is neither entirely independent of the development of the libido nor without influence upon the latter.
We certainly understand the development of the ego much less well than the development of the libido, because it is only by the
study of the narcissistic neuroses that we have just reached some hope of insight into the structure of the ego. Nevertheless, we
have already a notable attempt on the part of Ferenczi¹ to reconstruct theoretically the developmental stages of the ego; and there
are at least two points at which we have a secure foothold from which to examine this development further. We are not at all
disposed to think that the libidinal interests of a human being are from the outset in opposition to the interests of self-preservation ;
the ego is rather impelled at every stage to attempt to remain in harmony with the corresponding stage of sexual organization and to
accommodate itself to that. The succession of the separate phases in the development of the libido probably follows a prescribed
course; it is undeniable, however, that this course may be influenced from the direction of the ego. A certain parallelism, a definite
correspondence between the phases in the two developments (of the ego and of the libido) may also be assumed; indeed, a
disturbance in this correspondence may become a pathogenic factor. More important to us is the question of how the ego behaves
when the libido has undergone a powerful fixation at an earlier point in its development. The ego may countenance the fixation and
will then be perverse to that extent, or, what is the same thing, infantile; it
¹Ferenczi, Contributions to Psycho-Analysis. English translation by Ernest Jones (1916) chap. viii. p. 181.

may, however, hold itself averse from this attachment of libido, the result of which is that where the libido undergoes a fixation there
the ego institutes an act of repression.

In this way we arrive at the conclusion that the third factor in the aetiology of the neuroses, the susceptibility to conflict, is as much
connected with the development of the ego as with the development of the libido; our insight into the causation of the neuroses is
thus enlarged. First, there is the most general condition of privation, then the fixation of libido (forcing it into particular channels),
and thirdly, the susceptibility to conflict produced by the development of the ego having repudiated libidinal excitations of that
particular kind. The thing is, therefore, not so very obscure and intricate as you probably thought it during the course of my
exposition. To be sure, though, after all, we have not done with it yet; there is still something new to add and something we already
know to dissect further.

In order to demonstrate the effect of the development of the ego upon the tendency to conflict and therewith upon the causation of
the neurosis, I will quote an example which, although entirely imaginary, is not at all improbable in any respect. I will give it the title
of Nestroy's farce: On the Ground-Floor and in the Mansion. Suppose that a caretaker is living on the ground-floor of a house, while
the owner, a rich and well-connected man, lives above. They both have children, and we will assume that the owner's little girl is
permitted to play freely without supervision with the child of lower social standing. It may then very easily happen that their games
become "naughty," that is, take on a sexual character: that they play "father and mother," watch each other in the performance of
intimate acts, and stimulate each other's genital parts. The care taker's daughter may have played the temptress in this, since in spite
of her five or six years she has been able to learn a great deal about sexual matters. These occurrences, even though they are only
kept up for a short period, will be enough to rouse certain sexual excitations in both children which will come to expression in the
practice of masturbation for a few years, after the games have been discontinued. There is common ground so far, but the final result
will be very different in the two children. The caretaker's daughter will continue masturbation, perhaps up to the onset of
menstruation, and then give it up without difficulty; a few years later will find a lover, perhaps bear a child; choose this or that path
in life, perhaps become a popular actress and end as an aristocrat. Probably her career will turn out less brilliantly, but in any case
she will be unharmed by the premature sexual activity, free from neurosis, and able to live her life. Very different is the result in the
other child. She will very soon, while yet a child, acquire a sense of having done wrong; after a fairly short time she will give up the
masturbatory satisfaction, though perhaps only with a tremendous struggle, but will nevertheless retain an inner feeling of subdued
depression. When later on as a young girl she comes to learn something of sexual intercourse, she will turn from it with inexplicable
horror and wish to remain ignorant. Probably she will then again suffer a fresh irresistible impulse to masturbation about which she
will not dare to unburden herself to anyone. When the time comes for a man to choose her as a wife the neurosis will break out and
cheat her out of marriage and the joy of life. If analysis makes it possible to obtain an insight into this neurosis, it will be found that
this well-brought-up, intelligent and idealistic girl has completely repressed her sexual desires; but that they are, unconsciously,
attached to the few little experiences she had with the childish play-mate.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, 596d-597b

Now the path of perversion branches off sharply from that of neurosis. If these regressions do not call forth a prohibition on the part
of the ego, no neurosis results; the libido succeeds in obtaining a real, although not a normal satisfaction. But if the ego, which
controls not merely consciousness but also the approaches to motor innervation and hence the realization in actuality of mental
impulses, is not in agreement with these regressions, conflict ensues. The libido is blocked, as it were, and must seek an escape by
which it can find an outlet for its cathexis (charge of energy) in conformity with the demands of the pleasure principle: it must elude,
eschew the ego. The fixations upon the path of development now regressively traversed—fixations against which the ego had
previously guarded itself by repressions—offer just such an escape. In streaming backward and re-cathecting these repressed
positions, the libido withdraws itself from the ego and its laws; but it also abandons all the training acquired under the influence of
the ego. It was docile as long as satisfaction was in sight; under the double pressure of external and internal frustration it becomes
intractable and harks back to former happier days. That is its essential unchangeable character. The ideas to which the libido now
transfers its cathexis belong to the unconscious system and are subject to the special processes characteristic of that system—
namely, condensation and displacement. Conditions are thus set up which correspond exactly with those of dream-formation. Just as
the latent dream, first formed in the unconscious out of the thoughts proper, and constituting the fulfilment of an unconscious wish-
phantasy, meets with some (pre) conscious activity which exerts a censorship upon it and permits, according to its verdict, the
formation of a compromise in the manifest dream, so the ideas to which the libido is attached (libido-representatives) in the
unconscious have still to contend with the power of the preconscious ego. The opposition against it in the ego follows it as an anti-
cathexis (counter-charge) and forces it to adopt a form of expression by which the opposing forces can at the same time express
themselves. In this way the symptom then comes into being, as a derivative, distorted in manifold ways, of the unconscious libidinal
wish-fulfilment, as a cleverly chosen ambiguity with two completely contradictory significations. In this last point alone is there a
difference between dream-formation and symptom formation; for the preconscious purpose in dream-formation is merely to
preserve sleep and to allow nothing that would disturb it to penetrate consciousness; it does not insist upon confronting the
unconscious wish-impulse with a sharp prohibiting "No, on the contrary." It can be more tolerant because a -sleeping person is in a
less dangerous position; the condition of sleep is enough in itself to prevent the wish from being realized in actuality.

You see that this escape of the libido under the conditions of conflict is rendered possible by the existence of fixations. The regressive
cathexis (with libido) of these fixations leads to a circumventing of the repressions and to a discharge—or a satisfaction—of the
libido, in which the conditions of a compromise have nevertheless to be maintained. By this detour through the unconscious and the
old fixations the libido finally succeeds in attaining to a real satisfaction, though the satisfaction is certainly of an exceedingly
restricted kind and hardly recognizable as such. Let me add two remarks on this outcome. First, will you notice how closely
connected the libido and the unconscious, on the one hand, and the ego, conscious ness, and reality, on the other, show themselves
to be, although there were no such connections between them originally; and secondly, let me tell you that all I have said and have
still to say on this point concerns the neurosis of hysteria only.
Where does the libido find the fixations it needs in order to break through the repressions? In the activities and experiences of
infantile sexuality, in the component-tendencies and the objects of childhood which have been relinquished and abandoned. It is to
them, therefore, that the libido turns back. The significance of childhood is a double one; on the one hand the congenitally
determined instinct-dis positions are first shown at that time, and secondly, other instincts are then first awakened and activated by
external influences and accidental events experienced. In my opinion we are quite justified in laying down this dichotomy. That the
innate predisposition comes to expression will certainly not be disputed; but analytic observation even requires us to assume that
purely accidental experiences in childhood are capable of inducing fixations of libido. Nor do I see any theoretical difficulty in this.
Constitutional predispositions are undoubtedly the after-effects of the experiences of an earlier ancestry; they also have been at one
time acquired; without such acquired characters there would be no heredity. And is it conceivable that the acquisition of characters
which will be transmitted further should suddenly cease in the generation which is being observed today? The importance of the
infantile experiences should not, however, be entirely overlooked, as so often happens, in favour of ancestral experiences or of
experiences in adult life; but on the contrary they should be particularly appreciated. They are all the more pregnant with
consequences because they occur at a time of uncompleted development, and for this very reason are likely to have a traumatic
effect. The work done by Roux and others on the mechanism of development has shown that a needle pricked into an embryonic
cell-mass undergoing division results in serious disturbances of the development; the same injury to a larva or a full grown animal
would be innocuous.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, 609c-615b

A noteworthy connection between the symptoms of the actual neuroses and the psycho neuroses adds a valuable contribution to
our knowledge of symptom-formation in the latter; the symptom of the actual neurosis is frequently the nucleus and incipient stage
of the psychoneurotic symptom. A connection of this kind is most clearly observable between neurasthenia and the transference
neurosis known as conversion-hysteria, between the anxiety neurosis and anxiety-hysteria, but also between hypochondria and
forms of a neurosis which we shall deal with later on, namely, paraphrenia (dementia praecox and paranoia). As an ex ample, let us
take an hysterical headache or backache. Analysis shows that, by means of condensation and displacement, it has become a
substitutive satisfaction for a whole series of libidinal phantasies or memories; at one time, however, this pain was real, a direct
symptom of a sexual toxin, the bodily expression of a sexual excitation. We do not by any means maintain that all hysterical
symptoms have a nucleus of this kind, but it remains true that this very often is so, and that all effects (whether normal or
pathological) of the libidinal excitation upon the body are especially adapted to serve the purposes of hysterical symptom-formation.
They play the part of the grain of sand which the oyster envelops in mother-of-pearl. The temporary signs of sexual excitation
accompanying the sexual act serve the psychoneurosis in the same way, as the most suitable and convenient material for symptom-
formation.

There is a similar process of special diagnostic and therapeutic interest. In persons who are disposed to be neurotic without having
yet developed a neurosis on a grand scale, some morbid organic condition—perhaps an inflammation, or an injury—very commonly
sets the work of symptom-formation in motion; so that the latter process swiftly seizes upon the symptom supplied by reality, and
uses it to represent those unconscious phantasies that have only been lying in wait for some means of expression. In such a case, the
physician will try first one therapy and then the other; will either endeavour to abolish the organic foundation on which the symptom
rests, without troubling about the clamorous neurotic elaboration of it; or will attack the neurosis which this opportunity has brought
to birth, while leaving on one side the organic stimulus which incited it. Sometimes one and sometimes the other procedure will be
found justified by success; no general rules can be prescribed for mixed cases of this kind.

                                                       TWENTY-FIFTH LECTURE

                                                                Anxiety

You will certainly have judged the information that I gave you in the last lecture about ordinary nervousness as the most fragmentary
and most inadequate of all my accounts. I know that it was; and I expect that nothing surprised you more than that I made no
mention of the anxiety which most nervous people complain of and themselves describe as their most terrible burden. Anxiety or
dread can really develop tremendous intensity and in consequence be the cause of the maddest precautions. But in this matter at
least I wished not to cut you short; on the contrary, I had determined to put the problem of nervous anxiety to you as clearly as
possible and to discuss it at some length.

Anxiety (or dread) itself needs no description; everyone has personally experienced this sensation, or to speak more correctly this
affective condition at some time or other. But in my opinion not enough serious consideration has been given to the question why
nervous persons in particular suffer from anxiety so much more intensely, and so much more al together, than others. Perhaps it has
been taken for granted that they should; indeed, the words nervous and anxious are used interchangeably, as if they meant the same
thing. This is not justifiable, however; there are anxious people who are otherwise not in any way nervous and there are, besides,
neurotics with numerous symptoms who exhibit no tendency to dread.

However this may be, one thing is certain, that the problem of anxiety is a nodal point, linking up all kinds of most important
questions ; a riddle, of which the solution must cast a flood of light upon our whole mental life. I do not claim that I can give you a
complete solution; but you will certainly expect psycho analysis to have attacked this problem too in a different manner from that
adopted by academic medicine. Interest there centres upon the anatomical processes by which the anxiety condition comes about.
We learn that the medulla oblongata is stimulated, and the patient is told that he is suffering from a neurosis in the vagal nerve. The
medulla oblongata is a wondrous and beauteous object; I well remember how much time and labour I devoted to the study of it
years ago. But today I must say I know of nothing less important for the psychological comprehension of anxiety than a knowledge of
the nerve-paths by which the excitations travel.

One may consider anxiety for a long time without giving a thought to nervousness. You will understand me at once when I describe
this form of anxiety as Objective Anxiety; in contrast to neurotic anxiety. Now real anxiety or dread appears to us a very natural and
rational thing; we should call it a reaction to the perception of an external danger, of an injury which is expected and foreseen; it is
bound up with the reflex of flight, and may be regarded as an expression of the instinct of self-preservation. The occasions of it, i.e.,
the objects and situations about which anxiety is felt, will obviously depend to a great extent upon the state of the person's
knowledge and feeling of power regarding the outer world. It seems to us quite natural that a savage should be afraid of a cannon or
of an eclipse of the sun, while a white man who can handle the weapon and foretell the phenomenon remains unafraid in the same
situation. At other times, it is knowledge itself which inspires fear, because it reveals the danger sooner; thus a savage will recoil with
terror at the sight of a track in the jungle which conveys nothing to an ignorant white man, but means that some wild beast is near at
hand; and an experienced sailor will perceive with dread a little cloud on the horizon because it means an approaching hurricane,
while to a passenger it looks quite insignificant.

The view that objective anxiety is rational and expedient, however, will on deeper consideration be admitted to need thorough re
vision. In face of imminent danger the only expedient behaviour, actually, would be first a cool appraisement of the forces at disposal
as compared with the magnitude of the danger at hand, and then a decision whether flight or defence, or possibly attack, offered the
best prospect of a successful outcome. Dread, however, has no place in this scheme; everything to be done will be accomplished as
well and probably better if dread does not develop. You will see, too, that when dread is excessive it becomes in the highest degree
inexpedient; it paralyses every action, even that of flight. The reaction to danger usually consists in a combination of the two things,
the fear-affect and the defensive action; the frightened animal is afraid and flees, but the expedient element in this is the flight, not
the being afraid.

One is tempted therefore to assert that the development of anxiety is never expedient; perhaps a closer dissection of the situation in
dread will give us a better insight into it. The first thing about it is the readiness for danger, which expresses itself in heightened
sensorial perception and in motor tension. This expectant readiness is obviously advantageous; indeed, absence of it may be
responsible for grave results. It is then followed on the one hand by a motor action, taking the form primarily of flight and, on a
higher level, of defensive action; and on the other hand by the condition we call a sensation of anxiety or dread. The more the
development of dread is limited to a flash, to a mere signal, the less does it hinder the transition from the state of anxious readiness
to that of action, and the more expediently does the whole course of events proceed. The anxious readiness therefore seems to me
the expedient element, and the development of anxiety the inexpedient element, in what we call anxiety or dread.

I shall not enter upon a discussion whether the words anxiety, fear, fright, mean the same or different things in common usage. In my
opinion, anxiety relates to the condition and ignores the object, whereas in the word fear attention is directed to the object; fright
does actually seem to possess a special meaning— namely, it relates specifically to the condition induced when danger is
unexpectedly encountered without previous anxious readiness. It might be said, then, that anxiety is a protection again fright.

It will not have escaped you that a certain ambiguity and indefiniteness exists in the use of the word anxiety. It is generally
understood to mean the subjective condition arising upon the perception of what we have called developed anxiety; such a condition
is called an affect. Now what is an affect, in a dynamic sense? It is certainly something very complex. An affect comprises first of all
certain motor innervations or discharges; and, secondly, certain sensations, which moreover are of two kinds—namely, the
perceptions of the motor actions which have been performed, and the directly pleasurable or painful sensations which give the
affect what we call its dominant note. But I do not think that this description penetrates to the essence of an affect. With certain
affects one seems to be able to see deeper, and to recognize that the core of it, binding the whole complex structure together, is of
the nature of a repetition of some particular very significant previous experience. This experience could only have been an
exceedingly early impression of a universal type, to be found in the previous history of the species rather than of the individual. In
order to be better understood I might say that an affective state is constructed like an hysterical attack, i.e., is the precipitate of a
reminiscence. An hysterical attack is, therefore, comparable to a newly formed individual affect, and the normal affect to a universal
hysteria which has become a heritage.

Do not imagine that what I am telling you now about affects is the common property of normal psychology. On the contrary, these
conceptions have grown on the soil of psycho analysis and are only indigenous there. What psychology has to say about affects—the
James- Lange theory, for instance—is utterly incomprehensible to us psycho-analysts and imposable for us to discuss. We do not
however regard what we know of affects as at all final; it is a first attempt to take our bearings in this obscure region. To continue,
then: we believe we know what this early impression is which is reproduced as a repetition in the anxiety affect. We think it is the
experience of birth— an experience which involves just such a con catenation of painful feelings, of discharges of excitation, and of
bodily sensations, as to have become a prototype for all occasions on which life is endangered, ever after to be reproduced again in
us as the dread or anxiety condition. The enormous increase in stimulation effected by the interruption of the renewal of blood (the
internal respiration) was the cause of the anxiety experience at birth—the first anxiety was therefore toxically induced. The name
Angst (anxiety)—angustice, Enge, a narrow place, a strait—accentuates the characteristic tightening in the breathing which was then
the consequence of a real situation and is subsequently repeated almost invariably with an affect. It is very suggestive, too, that the
first anxiety state arose on the occasion of the separation from the mother. We naturally believe that the disposition to reproduce
this first anxiety condition has become so deeply in grained in the organism, through countless generations, that no single individual
can escape the anxiety affect; even though, like the legendary Macduff, he "was from his mother's womb untimely ripped" and so did
not himself experience the act of birth. What the prototype of the anxiety condition may be for other animals than mammals we
cannot say; neither do we know what the complex of sensations in them is which is equivalent to fear in us.

It may perhaps interest you to know how it was possible to arrive at such an idea as this— that birth is the source and prototype of
the anxiety affect. Speculation had least of all to do with it; on the contrary, I borrowed a thought from the naive intuitive mind of
the people. Many years ago a number of young house-physicians, including myself, were sitting round a dinner-table, and one of the
assistants at the obstetrical clinic was telling us all the funny stories of the last midwives’ examination. One of the candidates was
asked what it meant when the meconium (child's excreta) was present in the waters at birth, and promptly replied: "That the child is
frightened." She was ridiculed and failed. But I silently took her part and began to suspect that the poor unsophisticated woman's
unerring perception had revealed a very important connection.

Now let us turn to neurotic anxiety; what are the special manifestations and conditions found in the anxiety of nervous persons?
There is a great deal to be described here. First of all, we find a general apprehensiveness in them, a free-floating anxiety, as we call
it, ready to attach itself to any thought which is at all appropriate, affecting judgments, inducing expectations, lying in wait for any
opportunity to find a justification for itself. We call this condition expectant dread or anxious expectation. People who are tormented
with this kind of anxiety always anticipate the worst of all possible outcomes, interpret every chance happening as an evil omen, and
exploit every uncertainty to mean the worst. The tendency to this kind of expectation of evil is found as a character-trait in many
people who cannot be described as ill in any other way, and we call them over-anxious or pessimistic; but a marked degree of
expectant dread is an invariable accompaniment of the nervous disorder which I have called anxiety-neurosis and include among the
actual neuroses.

In contrast to this type of anxiety, a second form of it is found to be much more circumscribed in the mind, and attached to definite
objects and situations. This is the anxiety of the extraordinarily various and often very peculiar phobias. Stanley Hall, the
distinguished American psychologist, has recently taken the trouble to designate a whole series of these phobias by gorgeous Greek
titles; they sound like the ten plagues of Egypt, except that there are far more than ten of them. Just listen to the things that can
become the object or content of a phobia: darkness, open air, open spaces, cats, spiders, caterpillars, snakes, mice, thunder, sharp
points, blood, enclosed places, crowds, loneliness, crossing bridges, travelling by land or sea, and so on. As a first attempt to take
one's bearings in this chaos we may divide them into three groups. Many of the objects and situations feared are rather sinister, even
to us normal people they have some connection with danger; and these phobias are not entirely incomprehensible to us, although
their intensity seems very much exaggerated. Most of us, for instance, have a feeling of repulsion upon encountering a snake. It may
be said that the snake-phobia is universal in mankind. Charles Darwin has described most vividly how he could not control his dread
of a snake that darted at him, although he knew that he was protected from it by a thick plate of glass. The second group consists of
situations that still have some relation to danger, but to one that is usually belittled or not emphasized by us; most situation-phobias
belong to this group. We know that there is more chance of meeting with a disaster in a railway train than at home —namely, a
collision; we also know that a ship may sink, whereupon it is usual to be drowned; but we do not brood upon these dangers and we
travel without anxiety by train and boat. Nor can it be denied that, if a bridge were to break at the moment we are crossing it, we
should be hurled into the torrent, but that only happens so very occasionally that it is not a danger worth considering. Solitude too
has its dangers, which in certain circumstances we avoid, but there is no question of never being able to endure it for a moment
under any conditions. The same thing applies to crowds, enclosed spaces, thunderstorms, and so on. What is foreign to us in these
phobias is not so much their content as their intensity. The anxiety accompanying a phobia is positively indescribable! And we
sometimes get the impression that neurotics are not really at all fearful of those things which can, under certain conditions, arouse
anxiety in us and which they call by the same names.

There remains a third group which is entirely unintelligible to us. When a strong full-grown man is afraid to cross a street or square in
his own so familiar town, or when a healthy well-developed woman becomes almost sense less with fear because a cat has brushed
against her dress or a mouse has scurried through the room, how can we see the connection with danger which is obviously present
to these people? With this kind of animal-phobia it is no question of an increased intensity of common human antipathies; to prove
the contrary, there are numbers of people who, for instance, cannot pass a cat without attracting and petting it. A mouse is a thing
that so many women are afraid of, and yet it is at the same time a very favourite pet name; many a girl who is delighted to be called
so by her lover will scream with terror at the sight of the dainty little creature itself. The behaviour of the man who is afraid to cross
streets and squares only suggests one thing to us—that he behaves like a little child. A child is directly taught that such situations are
dangerous, and the man's anxiety, too, is allayed when he is led by someone across the open space.

The two forms of anxiety described, the free-floating expectant dread and that attached to phobias, are independent of each other.
The one is not the other at a further stage; they are only rarely combined, and then as if fortuitously. The most intense general
apprehensiveness does not necessarily lead to a phobia; people who have been hampered all their lives by agoraphobia may be
quite free from pessimistic expectant dread. Many phobias, e.g., fear of open spaces, of railway travelling, are demonstrably acquired
first in later life; others, such as fear of darkness, thunder, animals, seem to have existed from the beginning. The former signify
serious illness, the latter are more of the nature of idiosyncrasies, peculiarities; anyone exhibiting one of these latter may be
suspected of harbouring others similar to it. I must add that we group all these phobias under anxiety-hysteria, that is, we regard
them as closely allied to the well-known disorder called conversion-hysteria.

The third form taken by neurotic anxiety brings us to an enigma; there is no visible connection at all between the anxiety and the
danger dreaded. This anxiety occurs in hysteria, for instance, accompanying the hysterical symptoms; or under various conditions of
excitement in which, it is true, we should expect some affect to be displayed, but least of all an anxiety-affect; or without reference
to any conditions, incomprehensible both to us and to the patient, an unrelated anxiety-attack. We may look far and wide without
discovering a danger or an occasion which could even be exaggerated to account for it. These spontaneous attacks show, therefore,
that the complex condition which we describe as anxiety can be split up into components. The whole attack can be represented (as a
substitute) by a single intensively developed symptom—shuddering, faintness, palpitation of the heart, inability to breathe—and the
general feeling which we recognize as anxiety may be absent or may have become unnoticeable. And yet these states Which are
termed anxiety equivalents have the same clinical and aetiological validity as anxiety itself.

Two questions arise now: Is it possible to bring neurotic anxiety, in which such a small part or none at all is played by danger, into
relation with objective anxiety, which is essentially a reaction to danger? And, how is neurotic anxiety to be understood? We will at
present hold fast to the expectation that where there is anxiety there must be something of which one is afraid.

Clinical observation yields various clues to the comprehension of neurotic anxiety, and I will now discuss their significance with you.
(a) It is not difficult to see that expectant dread or general apprehensiveness stands in intimate relation to certain processes in the
sexual life—let us say, to certain modes of libido-utilization. The simplest and most instructive case of this kind arises in people who
expose themselves to what is called frustrated excitation, i.e., when a powerful sexual excitation experiences insufficient discharge
and is not carried on to a satisfying termination. This occurs, for instance, in men during the time of an engagement to marry, and in
women whose husbands are not sufficiently potent, or who perform the sexual act too rapidly or incompletely with a view to
preventing conception. Under these conditions the libidinal excitation dis appears and anxiety appears in place of it, both in the form
of expectant dread and in that of attacks and anxiety-equivalents. The precautionary measure of coitus interruptus, when practised
as a customary sexual regime, is so regularly the cause of anxiety-neurosis in men, and even more so in women, that medical
practitioners would be wise to enquire first of all into the possibility of such an aetiology in all such cases. Innumerable examples
show that the anxiety-neurosis vanishes when the sexual malpractice is given up.

So far as I know, the fact that a connection exists between sexual restraint and anxiety conditions is no longer disputed, even by
physicians who hold aloof from psycho-analysis. Nevertheless I can well imagine that they do not neglect to invert the connection,
and to put forward the view that such persons are predisposed to apprehensiveness and consequently practice caution in sexual
matters. Against this, however, decisive evidence is found in the re actions in women, in whom the sexual function is essentially
passive, so that its course is determined by the treatment accorded by the man. The more temperament, i.e., the more inclination
for sexual intercourse and capacity for satisfaction, a woman has, the more certainly will she react with anxiety manifestations to the
man's impotence or to coitus interruptus; whereas such abuse entails far less serious results with anaesthetic women or those in
whom the sexual hunger is less strong.

Sexual abstinence, which is nowadays so warmly recommended by physicians, of course only has the same significance for anxiety
conditions when the libido which is denied a satisfactory outlet is correspondingly insistent, and is not being utilized to a large extent
in sublimation. Whether or not illness will ensue is indeed always a matter of the quantitative factor. Even apart from illness, it is easy
to see in the sphere of character-formation that sexual restraint goes hand in hand with a certain anxiousness and cautiousness,
whereas fearless ness and a boldly adventurous spirit bring with them a free tolerance of sexual needs. However these relations may
be altered and complicated by the manifold influences of civilization, it remains incontestible that, for the average hu man being,
anxiety is closely connected with sexual restriction.

I have by no means told you all the observations which point to this genetic connection between libido and anxiety. There is, for
instance, the effect upon anxiety states of certain periods of life, such as puberty and the menopause, in which the production of
libido is considerably augmented. In many states of excitement, too, the mingling of sexual excitation with anxiety may be directly
observed as well as the final replacement of the libidinal excitation by anxiety. The impression received from all this is a double one;
first, that it is a matter of an accumulation of libido, debarred from its normal utilization; and secondly,, that the question is one of
somatic processes only. How anxiety develops out of sexual desire is at present obscure; we can only ascertain that desire is lacking
and anxiety is found in its place.

(b) A second clue is obtained from analysis of the psychoneuroses, in particular, of hysteria. We have heard that anxiety frequently
accompanies the symptoms in this disease, and that unattached anxiety may also be chronically present or come to expression in
attacks. The patients cannot say what it is they fear; they link it up by unmistakable secondary elaboration to the most convenient
phobias: of dying, of going mad, of having a stroke, etc. When we subject to analysis the situation in which the anxiety, or the
symptom accompanied by anxiety, arose, we can as a rule discover what normal mental process has been checked in its course and
replaced by a manifestation of anxiety. To express it differently: we construe the unconscious process as though it had not undergone
repression and had gone through unhindered into consciousness. This process would have been accompanied by a particular affect
and now we discover, to our astonishment, that this affect, which would normally accompany the mental process through into
consciousness, is in every case replaced by anxiety, no matter what particular type it had previously been. So that when we have a
hysterical anxiety condition before us, its unconscious correlative may be an excitation of a similar character, such as apprehension,
shame, embarrassment; or quite as possibly a positive libidinal excitation; or an antagonistic, aggressive one, such as rage or anger.
Anxiety is thus general current coin for which all the affects are exchanged or can be exchanged, when the corresponding ideational
content is under repression.

(c) A third observation is provided by patients whose symptoms take the form of obsessive acts, and who seem to be remarkably
immune from anxiety. When we restrain them from carrying out their obsessive performances, their washing, their ceremonies, etc.,
or when they themselves venture an attempt to abandon one of their compulsions, they are forced by an appalling dread to yield to
the compulsion and to carry out the act. We perceive that the anxiety was concealed under the obsessive act and that this is only
performed to escape the feeling of dread. In the obsessional neurosis, therefore, the anxiety which would otherwise ensue is
replaced by the symptom-formation; and when we turn to hysteria we find a similar relation existing—as a consequence of the
process of repression either a pure developed anxiety, or anxiety with symptom-formation, or symptom-formation without anxiety.
In an abstract sense, therefore, it seems correct to say that symptoms altogether are formed purely for the purpose of escaping the
otherwise inevitable development of anxiety. Thus anxiety comes to the fore-front of our interest in the problems of the neuroses.

We concluded from our observations on the anxiety-neurosis that the diversion of the libido away from its normal form of utilization,
a diversion which releases anxiety, took place on the basis of somatic processes. The analyses of hysterical and obsessional neuroses
furnish the additional conclusion that a similar diversion with a similar result can follow from opposition on the part of institutions in
the mind. We know as much as this, therefore, about the origin of neurotic anxiety; it still sounds rather indefinite. But for the
moment I know of no path which will take us further. The second task we undertook, that of establishing a connection between
neurotic anxiety (abnormally utilized libido) and objective anxiety ( which corresponds with the reaction to danger), seems even
more difficult to accomplish. One would think there could be no comparison between the two things, and yet there are no means by
which the sensations of neurotic anxiety can be distinguished from those of real anxiety.
54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 612c-d

Now let us turn to neurotic anxiety; what are the special manifestations and conditions found in the anxiety of nervous persons?
There is a great deal to be described here. First of all, we find a general apprehensiveness in them, a free-floating anxiety, as we call
it, ready to attach itself to any thought which is at all appropriate, affecting judgments, inducing expectations, lying in wait for any
opportunity to find a justification for itself. We call this condition expectant dread or anxious expectation. People who are tormented
with this kind of anxiety always anticipate the worst of all possible outcomes, interpret every chance happening as an evil omen, and
exploit every uncertainty to mean the worst. The tendency to this kind of expectation of evil is found as a character-trait in many
people who cannot be described as ill in any other way, and we call them over-anxious or pessimistic; but a marked degree of
expectant dread is an invariable accompaniment of the nervous disorder which I have called anxiety-neurosis and include among the
actual neuroses.

In contrast to this type of anxiety, a second form of it is found to be much more circumscribed in the mind, and attached to definite
objects and situations. This is the anxiety of the extraordinarily various and often very peculiar phobias. Stanley Hall, the
distinguished American psychologist, has recently taken the trouble to designate a whole series of these phobias by gorgeous Greek
titles; they sound like the ten plagues of Egypt, except that there are far more than ten of them. Just listen to the things that can
become the object or content of a phobia: darkness, open air, open spaces, cats, spiders, caterpillars, snakes, mice, thunder, sharp
points, blood, enclosed places, crowds, loneliness, crossing bridges, travelling by land or sea, and so on. As a first attempt to take
one's bearings in this chaos we may divide them into three groups. Many of the objects and situations feared are rather sinister, even
to us normal people they have some connection with danger; and these phobias are not entirely incomprehensible to us, although
their intensity seems very much exaggerated. Most of us, for instance, have a feeling of repulsion upon encountering a snake. It may
be said that the snake-phobia is universal in mankind. Charles Darwin has described most vividly how he could not control his dread
of a snake that darted at him, although he knew that he was protected from it by a thick plate of glass. The second group consists of
situations that still have some relation to danger, but to one that is usually belittled or not emphasized by us; most situation-phobias
belong to this group. We know that there is more chance of meeting with a disaster in a railway train than at home —namely, a
collision; we also know that a ship may sink, whereupon it is usual to be drowned; but we do not brood upon these dangers and we
travel without anxiety by train and boat. Nor can it be denied that, if a bridge were to break at the moment we are crossing it, we
should be hurled into the torrent, but that only happens so very occasionally that it is not a danger worth considering. Solitude too
has its dangers, which in certain circumstances we avoid, but there is no question of never being able to endure it for a moment
under any conditions. The same thing applies to crowds, enclosed spaces, thunderstorms, and so on. What is foreign to us in these
phobias is not so much their content as their intensity. The anxiety accompanying a phobia is positively indescribable! And we
sometimes get the impression that neurotics are not really at all fearful of those things which can, under certain conditions, arouse
anxiety in us and which they call by the same names.



54 FREUD: General Introduction, esp 615a-b

(c) A third observation is provided by patients whose symptoms take the form of obsessive acts, and who seem to be remarkably
immune from anxiety. When we restrain them from carrying out their obsessive performances, their washing, their ceremonies, etc.,
or when they themselves venture an attempt to abandon one of their compulsions, they are forced by an appalling dread to yield to
the compulsion and to carry out the act. We perceive that the anxiety was concealed under the obsessive act and that this is only
performed to escape the feeling of dread. In the obsessional neurosis, therefore, the anxiety which would otherwise ensue is
replaced by the symptom-formation; and when we turn to hysteria we find a similar relation existing—as a consequence of the
process of repression either a pure developed anxiety, or anxiety with symptom-formation, or symptom-formation without anxiety.
In an abstract sense, therefore, it seems correct to say that symptoms altogether are formed purely for the purpose of escaping the
otherwise inevitable development of anxiety. Thus anxiety comes to the fore-front of our interest in the problems of the neuroses.

We concluded from our observations on the anxiety-neurosis that the diversion of the libido away from its normal form of utilization,
a diversion which releases anxiety, took place on the basis of somatic processes. The analyses of hysterical and obsessional neuroses
furnish the additional conclusion that a similar diversion with a similar result can follow from opposition on the part of institutions in
the mind. We know as much as this, therefore, about the origin of neurotic anxiety; it still sounds rather indefinite. But for the
moment I know of no path which will take us further. The second task we undertook, that of establishing a connection between
neurotic anxiety (abnormally utilized libido) and objective anxiety ( which corresponds with the reaction to danger), seems even
more difficult to accomplish. One would think there could be no comparison between the two things, and yet there are no means by
which the sensations of neurotic anxiety can be distinguished from those of real anxiety.
54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, 718a-747b

The activity of the dangerous death-instincts within the individual organism is dealt with in various ways; in part they are rendered
harm less by being fused with erotic components, in part they are diverted towards the external world in the form of aggression,
while for the most part they undoubtedly continue their inner work unhindered. How is it then that in melancholia the super-ego can
become a kind of gathering-place for the death-instincts?

From the point of view of morality, the control and restriction of instinct, it may be said of the id that it is totally non-moral, of the
ego that it strives to be moral, and of the super ego that it can be hyper-moral and then becomes as ruthless as only the id can be. It
is remarkable that the more a man checks his aggressive tendencies towards others the more tyrannical, that is aggressive, he
becomes in his ego-ideal. The ordinary view sees the situation the other way round: the standard set up by the ego-ideal seems to be
the motive for the suppression of aggressiveness. The fact remains, however, as we have stated it: the more a man controls his
aggressiveness, the more intense become the aggressive tendencies of his ego-ideal against his ego. It is like a displacement, a
turning round upon the self. But even ordinary normal morality has a harshly restraining, cruelly prohibiting quality. It is from this,
indeed, that the conception arises of an inexorable higher being who metes out punishment.

I cannot go further in my consideration of these questions without introducing a fresh assumption. The super-ego arises, as we know,
from an identification with the father regarded as a model. Every such identification is in the nature of a desexualization or even of a
sublimation. It now seems as though when a transformation of this kind takes place there occurs at the same time an instinctual
defusion. After sublimation, the erotic component no longer has the power to bind the whole of the destructive elements that were
previously combined with it, and these are released in the form of inclinations to aggression and destruction. This defusion would be
the source of the general character of harshness and cruelty exhibited by the ideal—its dictatorial "Thou shalt."

Let us again consider the obsessional neurosis for a moment. The state of affairs is different here. The defusion of love into
aggressiveness has not been effected by the agency of the ego, but is the result of a regression which has come about in the id. But
this process has extended beyond the id to the super-ego, which now increases its tryanny over the innocent ego. It would seem,
however, that in this case no less than in that of melancholia, the ego, having gained possession of the libido by means of
identification, is punished for doing so by the super-ego through the instrumentality of the aggressiveness which had before been
mixed with the libido.

Our ideas about the ego are beginning to clear, and its various relationships are gaining distinctness. We now see the ego in its
strength and in its weaknesses. It is entrusted with important functions. By virtue of its relation to the perceptual system, it arranges
the processes of the mind in a temporal order and tests their correspondence with reality. By interposing the process of thinking it
secures a postponement of motor discharges and controls the avenues to motility. This last office is, to be sure, a question more of
form than of fact, in the matter of action the ego's position is like that of a constitutional monarch, without whose sanction no law
can be passed but who hesitates long before imposing a veto on any measure put forward by Parliament. All the experiences of life
that originate from without enrich the ego; the id, however, is another outer world to it, which it strives to bring into subjection to
itself. It withdraws libido from the id and transforms the object-cathexes of the id into ego-constructions. With the aid of the super
ego, though in a manner that is still obscure to us, it draws upon the experiences of past ages stored in the id.

There are two paths by which the contents of the id can penetrate into the ego. The one is direct, the other leads by way of the ego-
ideal; which of these two paths they take may, for many mental activities, be of decisive importance. The ego develops from
perceiving instincts to controlling them, from obeying instincts to curbing them. In this achievement a large share is taken by the ego-
ideal, which, indeed, is partly a reaction-formation against the instinctual processes in the id. Psycho analysis is an instrument to
enable the ego to push its conquest of the id further still.

From the other point of view, however, we see this same ego as a poor creature owing service to three masters and consequently
menaced by three several dangers: from the Freud external world, from the libido of the id, and The from the severity of the super-
ego. Three kinds of anxiety correspond to these three dangers, since anxiety is the expression of a recoil from danger. Like the
dweller in a borderland that it is, the ego tries to mediate between the world and the id, to make the id comply with the world's
demands and, by means of muscular activity, to accommodate the world to the id's desires. In point of fact, it behaves like the
physician during treatment by analysis; it offers itself to the id as a libidinal object in view of its power of adaptation to the real
world, and aims at attaching the id's libido to itself. It is not only the ally of the id; it is also a submissive slave who courts the love of
his master. Whenever possible, it tries to remain on good terms with the id; it draws the veil of its Pes rationalizations over the id's
Ucs demands; it pretends that the id is showing obedience to the mandates of reality, even when in fact it is remaining obdurate and
immovable; it throws a disguise over the id's conflicts with reality and, if possible, over its conflicts with the super-ego too. Its
position midway between the id and reality tempts it only too often to become sycophantic, opportunist, and false, like a politician
who sees the truth but wants to keep his place in popular favour.

Towards the two classes of instincts the ego's attitude is not impartial. Its work of identification and sublimation gives the death-
instincts in the id assistance in mastering the libido, but in so doing it incurs the risk of itself becoming the object of the death-
instincts and of perishing. In order to be able to help in this way, it has to become flooded with libido itself; it thus becomes the
representative of Eros and thence forward desires to live and to be loved.

But since the ego's work of sublimation results in a defusion of the instincts and a liberation of the aggressive instincts in the super-
ego, its struggle against the libido exposes it to the danger of maltreatment and death. In suffering under the attacks of the super-
ego or perhaps even succumbing to them, the ego is meeting with a fate like that of the protozoa which are destroyed by the
products of disintegration that they themselves have created. From the economic point of view, the morality that functions in the
super-ego seems to be a similar product of disintegration.

Amongthe subordinate relationships in which the ego stands, that to the super-ego is perhaps the most interesting.

The ego is the true abode of anxiety. Threatened by dangers from three directions, it develops the flight-reflex by withdrawing its
own cathexis from the menacing perception or from the equally dreaded process in the id, and discharging it as anxiety. This
primitive reaction is later replaced by the introduction of protective cathexes (the mechanism of the phobias). What it is that the ego
fears either from an external or from a libidinal danger cannot be specified; we know that it is in the nature of an overthrow or of
extinction, but it is not determined by analysis. The ego is simply obeying the warning of the pleasure-principle. On the other hand,
we can tell what lies hidden behind the ego's dread of the super-ego, its fear of conscience. The higher being which later became the
ego-ideal once threatened the ego with castration, and this dread of castration is probably the kernel round which the subsequent
fear of conscience has gathered; it is this dread that persists as the fear of conscience.

The high-sounding phrase, "Every fear is ultimately the fear of death," has hardly any meaning; at any rate, it cannot be justified. It
seems to me, on the contrary, perfectly correct to distinguish the fear of death from dread of an external object (objective anxiety)
and from neurotic libidinal anxiety. It presents a difficult problem to psycho-analysis, for death is an abstract concept with a negative
content for which no unconscious correlative can be found. It would seem that the mechanism of the fear of death can only be that
the ego relinquishes its narcissistic libidinal cathexis in a very large measure, that is, that it gives up itself, just as it gives up some
external object in other cases in which it feels anxiety. I believe that the fear of death concerns an interplay between the ego and the
super-ego.

We know that the fear of death makes its appearance under two conditions (which, moreover, are entirely analogous to the other
situations in which anxiety develops), namely, as a reaction to an external danger and as an internal process, as for instance in
melancholia. Once again a neurotic manifestation may help us to understand a normal one.

The fear of death in melancholia only admits of one explanation: that the ego gives itself up because it feels itself hated and
persecuted by the super-ego, instead of loved. To the ego, therefore, living means the same as being loved —being loved by the
super-ego, which here again appears as the representative of the id. The super-ego fulfils the same function of protecting and saving
that was fulfilled in earlier days by the father and later by Providence or destiny. But, when the ego finds itself in over whelming
danger of a real order which it believes itself unable to overcome by its own strength, it is bound to draw the same conclusion. It
sees itself deserted by all the forces of protection and lets itself die. Here, moreover, is once again the same situation as that which
underlay the first great anxiety-state of birth and the infantile anxiety of longing for an absent person—the anxiety of separation
from the protecting mother.

These considerations enable us to conceive of the fear of death, like the fear of conscience, as a development of the fear of
castration. The great significance which the sense of guilt has in the neuroses makes it conceivable that ordinary neurotic anxiety is
reinforced in severe cases by a development of anxiety between the ego and the super-ego (fear of castration, of conscience, of
death).

The id, to which we finally come back, has no means of showing the ego either love or hate. It cannot say what it-wants; it has
achieved no unity of will. Eros and the death instinct struggle within it; we have seen with what weapons the one group of instincts
defends itself against the other. It would be possible to picture the id as under the domination of the mute but powerful death-
Instincts, which desire to be at peace and (as the pleasure principle demands) to put Eros, the intruder, to rest; but that would be to
run' the risk of valuing too cheaply the part played by Eros.
                                                 Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
                                                                         CHAPTER I

In describing pathological phenomena, we are enabled by the ordinary usages of speech to distinguish symptoms from inhibitions,
without, however, attaching much importance to the distinction. Indeed, we might hardly think it worthwhile to differentiate more
exactly between the two, were it not for the fact that we meet with illnesses in which we observe the presence of inhibitions but not
of symptoms and are curious to know the reason for this.

The two concepts are not upon the same plane. Inhibition has a special relation to function. It does not necessarily have a
pathological implication. One can quite well call a normal restriction of a function an inhibition of it. A symptom, on the other hand,
actually denotes the presence of some pathological process. Thus, an inhibition (among other things) may be a symptom. In ordinary
speech, we should use the word inhibition when there is a simple lowering of function, and symptom when a function has
undergone some unusual change or when a new phenomenon has arisen out of it. Very often it seems to be quite an arbitrary
matter whether we emphasize the positive side of a pathological process and call its consequences a symptom, or its negative side
and call them an inhibition. But all this is really of little interest; and the problem as we have stated it does not carry us very far.

Since the concept of inhibition is so intimately associated with that of function, we may perhaps proceed to examine the various
functions of the ego with a view to discovering what forms any disturbance of those functions will assume in each of the different
neurotic affections. Let us pick out for a comparative study of this kind the sexual function and those of eating, of locomotion, and of
occupational work.

(a) The sexual function Is liable to a great number of disturbances, most of which exhibit the characteristics of simple inhibitions.
These are classed together as psychical impotence. The normal performance of the sexual function can only come about as the result
of a very complicated process, and disturbances may appear at any point in it. In men the chief points at which inhibition occurs are
shown by: a turning away of the libido at the very beginning of the process (psychological unpleasure¹); an abridgment of the sexual
act (ejaculatio praecox), an occurrence which might equally well be regarded as a symptom; an arrest of the act before it has reached
its natural conclusion (absence of ejaculation); or a non-appearance of the psychological results (lack of pleasure in orgasm). Other
disturbances arise from the sexual function becoming dependent on special conditions of a perverse or fetishistic nature.

That there is a relationship between inhibition and anxiety is pretty evident. Many inhibitions obviously represent a relinquishment
of a function whose exercise would produce anxiety. Many women are openly afraid of the sexual function. We class this anxiety
under hysteria, just as we do the defensive symptom of disgust which, arising originally as a deferred reaction to the experiencing of
a passive sexual act, appears later whenever the idea of such an act is presented. Furthermore, many obsessional acts turn out to be
measures of precaution and security against sexual experiences and are thus of a phobic character.

This is not very illuminating. We can only note that disturbances of the sexual function are brought about by a great variety of
means, (i) The libido may simply be turned away (this seems most readily to produce what we regard as an inhibition pure and
simple); (2) the function may be less well carried out; (3) it may be hampered by having conditions attached to it, or modified by
being diverted to other aims; (4) it may be prevented by measures of security; (5) if it cannot be prevented from starting, it may be
immediately interrupted by the appearance of anxiety; and (6), if it is nevertheless carried out, there may be a subsequent reaction
of protest against it and an attempt to undo what has been done.

(b) The function of nutrition is most frequently disturbed by a disinclination to eat, brought about by a withdrawal of libido. An
¹Throughout this work, Unlust has been translated by the constructed word "unpleasure," while reserving "pain" for the German Schmerz—TR.

increase in the desire to eat is also a not uncommon thing. The compulsion to eat is at tributed to a fear of starving; but this is a
subject which has been but little studied. The hysterical defence against eating is known to us in the symptom of vomiting. Refusal to
eat owing to anxiety is a concomitant of psychotic states (delusions of being poisoned).

(c) In many neurotic conditions, locomotion is inhibited by a disinclination to walk or a weakness in walking. In hysteria, there will be
a paralysis of the motor apparatus, or this one special function of the apparatus will be abolished (abasia). Especially characteristic
are the increased difficulties that appear in loco motion owing to the introduction of certain stipulations whose non-observance
results in anxiety (phobia).

(d) In inhibition in work—a thing which we so often have to deal with as an isolated symptom in our therapeutic work—the subject
feels a decrease in his pleasure in it or becomes less able to do it well; or he has certain reactions to it, like fatigue, giddiness, or
sickness, if he is obliged to go on with it. If he is a hysteric he will have to give up his work, owing to the appearance of organic and
functional impairments of activity which make it impossible for him to carry it on. If he is an obsessional neurotic, he will be
perpetually being distracted from his work or losing time over it owing to delays and repetitions.

Our survey might be extended to other functions of the ego as well; but there would be nothing more to be learned by doing so, for
we should not penetrate below the surface of the phenomena presented to us. Let us then proceed to describe inhibition in such a
way as to leave very little doubt about what is meant by it, and say that inhibition is the expression of a restriction of an ego-
function.

A restriction of this kind can itself have very different causes. Many of the mechanisms in volved in a renunciation of function are
well known to us, as is a certain general purpose which runs through it. This purpose is more easily recognizable in the specific
inhibitions. Analysis shows that, when activities, like playing the piano, writing, or even walking, undergo neurotic inhibitions, it is
because the physical organs brought into play—the fingers or the feet—have become too strongly eroticized. It has been discovered
as a general fact that the ego-function of an organ is impaired if its erotogenicity—its sexual significance—is increased. It behaves, if I
may be allowed a somewhat vulgar analogy, like a maid-servant who refuses to go on cooking because her master has started a love-
affair with her. As soon as writing, which entails making a liquid substance flow on to a piece of white paper, assumes the significance
of copulation, or as soon as walking becomes a symbolic substitute for treading upon the body of mother earth, both writing and
walking are stopped because they represent the performance of a forbidden sexual act. The ego renounces these functions, which
are within its sphere, in order not to have to undertake fresh measures of repression—in order to avoid coming into conflict with the
id.

There are clearly also inhibitions which serve the purpose of self-punishment. This is often the case in inhibitions of occupational
activities. The ego is not allowed to carry on those activities, because they would bring success and gain, and these are things which
the severe super-ego has forbidden. So the ego gives them up too, in order to avoid coming into conflict with the super-ego.

The more generalized inhibitions of the ego obey a different mechanism of a simple kind. When the ego is faced with a particularly
difficult mental task, as occurs in mourning or when there is some tremendous suppression of affect or when a continual flood of
sexual phantasies is being kept down, it loses so much of the energy at its disposal that it has to cut down the expenditure of it at
many points at once. It is in the position of a speculator whose money has become tied up in various enterprises. I came across an
instructive example of this kind of intense, though short-lived, general inhibition. The patient, an obsessional neurotic, used to be
overcome by a paralysing fatigue which lasted for one or more days whenever something occurred which should obviously have
thrown him into a rage. We have here a point of departure from which we may hope to reach an understanding of the condition of
general inhibition which characterizes states of depression, including the gravest form of them, melancholia.

As regards inhibitions, then, we may say in conclusion that they are restrictions of the functions of the ego which have either been
imposed as a measure of precaution or brought about as a result of an impoverishment of energy; and we can see without difficulty
in what respect an inhibition differs from a symptom: for a symptom cannot be described as a process that takes place within, or acts
upon, the ego.

                                                               CHAPTER II

The main characteristics of the formation of symptoms have long since been studied and, I hope, established beyond dispute. A
symptom is a sign of, and a substitute for, an instinctual gratification which has remained in abeyance; it is a consequence of the
process of repression. Repression proceeds from the ego when the latter—it may be at the behest of the super-ego —refuses to
associate itself with an instinctual cathexis which has been aroused in the id. The ego is able by means of repression to keep the idea
which is the vehicle of the reprehensible impulse from becoming conscious. Analysis shows that the idea often persists as an
unconscious formation.

So far everything seems clear; but we soon come upon difficulties which have not as yet been solved. Up till now our account of what
occurs in repression has laid great stress on this point of exclusion from consciousness. But it has left other points open to
uncertainty. One question that arose was: what happened to the instinctual impulse which had been actuated in the id and which
sought to be gratified? The answer was an indirect one. It was that, owing to the process of repression, the pleasure that would have
been expected from gratification had been transformed into unpleasure. But we were then faced with the problem of how the
gratification of an instinct could produce un pleasure. The whole matter can be clarified, I think, if we commit ourselves to the
definite statement that, as a result of repression, the intended course of the excitatory process in the id does not occur at all; the ego
succeeds in inhibiting or deflecting it. If this is so the problem of transformation of affect under repression disappears. At the same
time, this view implies that the ego can exert a very extensive influence over processes in the id, and we shall have to find out in
what way it is able to develop such astonishing powers.
It seems to me that the ego obtains this influence in virtue of its intimate connections with the perceptual system—connections
which, as we know, constitute its essence and provide the basis of its differentiation from the id. In its function, the perceptual
system, which we have called Pcpt-Cs, is bound up with the phenomenon of consciousness. It receives excitations not only from
outside but from within and endeavours, by means of the pleasure-unpleasure sensations which reach it from these directions, to
direct the course of every mental event in accordance with the pleasure-principle.

We are very apt to think of the ego as power less against the id; but, when it is opposed to an instinctual process, it has only to give a
signal of unpleasure in order to attain its: object with the aid of that almost omnipotent institution, the pleasure-principle. To take
this situation by itself for a moment, we can illustrate it by an example from another field. Let us imagine a country in which a certain
small faction objects to a proposed measure the passage of which would have the support of the masses. This minority obtains
command of the press and by its help manipulates the supreme arbiter, public opinion, and so succeeds in preventing the measure
from being passed.

But this explanation opens up fresh problems. Whence does the energy come which is employed for giving the signal of unpleasure?
Here we may be assisted by the idea that a defence against an unwelcome internal process will be modelled upon the defence
adopted against an external stimulus, that the ego wards off internal and external dangers alike along identical lines. In the case of
external danger, the organism has recourse to attempts at flight. The first thing it does is to withdraw cathexis from the perception of
the dangerous object; later on it discovers that it is a better plan to perform muscular movements of such a sort as will render
perception of the dangerous object impossible, even in the absence of any refusal to perceive it—that it is a better plan, that is, to
remove itself from the sphere of danger. Repression is an equivalent of this attempt at flight. The ego withdraws its (preconscious)
cathexis from the psychical representative of the impulse that is to be repressed and uses that cathexis for the purpose of re leasing
unpleasure (anxiety). The problem of how anxiety arises in connection with repression may be no simple one; but we may
legitimately maintain the opinion that the ego is the actual seat of anxiety and give up our earlier view that the cathectic energy of a
re pressed impulse is automatically turned into anxiety. If I expressed myself in the latter sense on former occasions, I was giving a
phenomenological description and not a meta-psychological explanation of what was occurring.

This brings us to a further question: how is it possible, from an economic point of view, for a mere process of withdrawal and
discharge, like the withdrawing of a pre-conscious ego-cathexis, to produce unpleasure or anxiety, seeing that, according to our
assumptions, unpleasure and anxiety can only arise as a result of an increase in cathexis? The reply is that this causal sequence
should not be explained from an economic point of view. In repression, anxiety is not newly created; it is reproduced as an affective
state on the. model of an already existing memory picture. If we go further and enquire into the origin of that anxiety—and of affects
in general—we shall be leaving the realm of pure psychology and entering the confines of physiology. Affective states have become
incorporated in the mind as precipitates of primeval traumatic experiences, and when a similar situation occurs they are revived in
the form of memory symbols. I do not think I have been wrong in likening them to the more recent and individually acquired
hysterical attack and in regarding them as normal prototypes of it. In man and the higher animals it would seem that the act of birth,
as the individual's first experience of anxiety, has given the affect of anxiety certain characteristic forms of expression. But, while
acknowledging this connection, we must not lay undue stress on it nor overlook the fact that biological necessity demands that a
situation of danger should have an affective symbol, so that a symbol of this kind would have to be created in any case. Moreover, I
do not think that we are justified in assuming that whenever there is an outbreak of anxiety something like a reproduction of the
situation of birth goes on in the mind. It is not even certain whether hysterical attacks, though they were originally traumatic
reproductions of this sort, permanently retain that character.

As I have shown elsewhere, most of the repressions with which we have to deal in our therapeutic work are cases of after-expulsion.
They presuppose the operation of earlier, primal repressions which exert an attraction on the more recent situation. Far too little is
known as yet about the background and preliminary stages of repression. There is a danger of over-estimating the part played in
repression by the super-ego. We cannot at present say, for instance, whether it is the emergence of the super-ego which provides
the line of demarcation between primal repression and after-expulsion. At any rate, the earliest out breaks of anxiety, which are of a
very intense kind, occur before the super-ego has become differentiated. It is highly probable that the precipitating causes of primal
repression are quantitative factors such as an excessive degree of excitation and the breaking through of the protective barrier
against stimuli.

This mention of the protective barrier sounds a note which recalls to us the fact that repressions occur in two different situations,
namely, when an undesirable instinctual impulse is aroused by some external perception, and when it arises internally without any
such provocation. We shall return to this difference presently. But the protective barrier only exists in regard to external stimuli, not
in regard to internal instinctual demands.
So long as we direct our attention to the ego's attempt at flight, we shall get no nearer to the subject of symptom-formation. A
symptom arises from an instinctual impulse which has been prejudicially affected by repression. If the ego, by making use of the
signal of unpleasure, attains its object of completely suppressing the instinctual impulse, we learn nothing of how this has happened.
We can only find out about it from those cases in which repression has to a greater or less extent failed. In this event the position,
generally speaking, is that the instinctual impulse has found a substitute in spite of repression, but a substitute which is very much
reduced, displaced, and inhibited, and which is no longer recognizable as a gratification. And when the impulse is carried out, there is
no sensation of pleasure; its carrying out has, instead, the quality of a compulsion.

In thus degrading a gratificatory process to a symptom, repression displays its power in a further respect. The substitutive process is
prevented, if possible, from finding discharge through motility; and even if this cannot be done the process is forced to expend itself
in making alterations in the subject's own body and is not permitted to impinge upon the outer world. It may not be transformed
into action. For, as we know, in repression the ego is operating under the influence of external reality and therefore it debars the
substitutive process from having any effect upon that reality.

Just as the ego controls the path to action in regard to the outer world, so it controls access to consciousness. In repression it displays
its power in both directions, acting, in the one manner, upon the instinctual impulse itself and, in the other, upon the psychical
representative of that impulse. At this point it is relevant to ask how I can reconcile this acknowledgment of the might of the ego
with the description of its position which I gave in The Ego and the Id. In that book I drew a picture of its dependence upon the id
and upon the super-ego which revealed how powerless and apprehensive it was in regard to both and with what an effort it
maintained its superiority over them. This view has been widely echoed in psycho-analytic literature. A great deal of stress has been
laid on the weakness of the ego in relation to the id and of our rational elements in the face of the demonic forces within us; and
there is a strong tendency to make what I have said into a foundation-stone of a psycho-analytic Weltanschauung. Yet surely the
psycho-analyst, with his knowledge of the way in which repression works, should, of all people, be restrained from adopting such
extreme and one-sided views.

I must confess that I am not at all partial to the fabrication of Weltanschauungen. Such activities may be left to philosophers, who
avowedly find it impossible to make their journey through life without a Baedeker of that kind to tell them all about everything. Let
us humbly accept the contempt with which they look down on us from the vantage-ground of their superior needs. But since we too
cannot forego our narcissistic pride, we will draw com fort from the reflection that such "Guides to Life" soon grow out of date, and
that it is precisely short-sighted, narrow, and finicky work like ours which obliges them to appear in new editions, and that even the
most up-to-date of them are nothing but attempts to find a substitute for the ancient, useful, and all embracing catechism. We know
well enough how little light science has so far been able to throw on the problems that surround us. But however much ado the
philosophers may make, they cannot alter the situation. Only patient, persevering research, in which everything is subordinated to
the one requirement of certainty, can gradually bring about a change. The benighted traveller may sing aloud in the dark to deny his
own fears; but, for all that, he will not see an inch further beyond his nose.

                                                               CHAPTER III

To return to this problem about the ego. The apparent contradiction is due to our having taken abstractions too rigidly and attended
exclusively now to the one side and now to the other of what is in reality a complicated state of affairs. We were justified, I think, in
dividing the ego from the id, for there were certain considerations which necessitated that step. On the other hand, the ego is
identical with the id, and is merely a specially differentiated part of it. If we regard this part by itself, in contradistinction to the
whole, or if a real split has occurred between the two, the weakness of the ego becomes apparent. But if the ego remains bound up
with the id and indistinguishable from it, then it displays its power. The same is true of the relation between the ego and the super-
ego. In many situations, the two are merged; and as a rule we can only distinguish one from the other when there is a tension or
conflict between them. In repression, the decisive fact is that the ego is an organization and the id is not. The ego is, indeed, the
organized portion of the id. We should be quite wrong in picturing the ego and the id as two opposing camps and in thinking that,
when the ego tries to suppress a part of the id by means of repression, the remainder of the id comes to the rescue of the
endangered part and measures its strength with the ego. This may often be what happens, but it is not the primary situation in
repression. As a rule, the instinctual impulse which is to be repressed remains isolated. Al though the act of repression demonstrates
the strength of the ego, in one particular it reveals the ego's powerlessness and reveals, too, how impervious to influence are the
separate instinctual impulses of the id. For the mental process, which has been turned into a symptom owing to repression,
maintains its existence outside the organization of the ego and independently of it. Indeed, it is not the process alone but all its
derivatives which enjoy, as it were, the privilege of extra-territoriality; and whenever they come into associative contact with a part
of the ego-organization, it is not at all certain that they will not draw that part over to themselves and thus enlarge themselves at the
expense of the ego. Long ago I compared a symptom to a foreign body which was keeping up a constant succession of stimuli and
reactions in the tissue in which it was imbedded. It does sometimes happen that the defensive struggle against an unwelcome
instinctual impulse is brought to an end with the formation of a symptom. As far as can be seen, this is most often possible in
hysterical conversions. But usually the outcome is different. The initial act of repression is followed by tedious and often interminable
manoeuvres in which the struggle against the instinctual impulse is prolonged into a struggle against the symptom.

In this secondary defensive struggle, the ego faces two ways. The one line of behaviour it adopts springs from the fact that its very
nature obliges it to make what must be regarded as an attempt at restoration or reconciliation. The ego is an organization. It is based
upon the maintenance of free intercourse and of the possibility of reciprocal influence between all its parts. Its de-sexualized energy
still shows traces of its origin in its tendency to bind together and unify, and this necessity to synthetize grows stronger in proportion
as the strength of the ego increases. It is therefore only natural that the ego should try to prevent symptoms from remaining isolated
and foreign by using every possible method to bind them to itself in one way or another, and to incorporate them in its organization
by means of those bonds. As we know, a tendency of this kind is already operative in the very act of forming a symptom. A classical
instance of this are those hysterical symptoms which have been shown to be a compromise between the need for gratification and
the need for punishment. Such symptoms participate in the ego from the very beginning, since they fulfil a requirement of the super-
ego, while, on the other hand, they represent positions occupied by the repressed and points at which an irruption has been made
by it into the ego-organization. They are a kind of frontier-position with a mixed cathexis. (Whether all primary hysterical symptoms
are constructed on these lines would be worth enquiring into very carefully.) The ego now proceeds to behave as though it
recognized that the symptom had come to stay and that the only thing to do was to accept the situation in good part and draw as
much advantage from it as possible. It makes an adaptation to the symptom—to this piece of the internal world which is alien to it—
just as it normally does to the objective, external world. It can always find plenty of opportunities for doing so. The presence of a
symptom may entail a certain impairment of the capacities of the individual, and this can be exploited to appease some demand on
the part of the super-ego or to refuse some requirement coming from the external world. In this way, the symptom gradually grows
to be the representative of important interests; it is found to be useful for the maintenance of the self and becomes more and more
closely merged with the ego and more and more indispensable to it. It is only very rarely that the physical process of healing round a
foreign body follows such a course as this. There is a danger, too, of exaggerating the importance of a secondary adaptation of this
kind to a symptom, and of saying that the ego has created the symptom merely in order to enjoy its advantages. It would be equally
true to say that a man who had lost his leg in the war had got it shot away so that he might thenceforward live on his pension
without having to work any more.

In obsessional neurosis and paranoia, the forms which the symptoms assume become very valuable to the ego because they obtain
for it, not certain advantages, but a narcissistic gratification which it would otherwise forgo. The symptoms which the obsessional
neurotic constructs flatter his self-esteem by making him feel that he is better than others because he is specially cleanly or specially
conscientious. The delusional constructions of the paranoiac offer to his acute perceptive and imaginative powers a field of activity
which he could not easily find elsewhere.

All of this results in what is known as the epinosic gain of a neurosis. This epinosic gain comes to the assistance of the ego in its
endeavour to incorporate the symptom and in creases the fixation of the latter. When the analyst tries to help the ego in its struggle
against the symptom, he finds that these reconciliatory bonds between ego and symptom operate on the side of the resistances and
that they are not easy to loosen.

The two lines of behaviour which the ego adopts towards the symptom are in fact directly opposed to each other. For the other line
is less friendly in character, since it continues in the direction of repression. Nevertheless the ego, it appears, cannot be accused of
inconsistency. Being of a peaceable disposition it would like to incorporate the symptom in its framework. It is from the symptom
itself that the trouble comes. For the symptom, being the true substitute and derivative of the repressed impulse, carries on the role
of the latter; it continually renews its demands for gratification and thus obliges the ego in its turn to give the signal of unpleasure
and put itself in a posture of defence.

The secondary defensive struggle against the symptom is many-sided. It is fought out on many fields and makes use of a multitude of
means. We shall not be able to say much about it until we have made an enquiry into individual cases of symptom-formation. In
doing this we shall have an opportunity of going into the problem of anxiety—a problem which has long been looming in the
background. The wisest plan will be, I think, to start from the symptoms produced by the hysterical neuroses; for we are not as yet in
a position to consider the conditions in which the symptoms of obsessional neurosis, paranoia, and other neuroses are formed.

                                                               CHAPTER IV

Let us take as our first example an infantile hysterical phobia of animals. We will select the case of Little Hans,¹ whose phobia of
horses was undoubtedly typical in all its main features. The first thing that is apparent is that in a concrete case of neurotic illness the
state of affairs is much more complex than one would suppose so long as one was dealing with abstractions. It takes some time to
orientate oneself and to decide which the repressed impulse is, what substitutive symptom it has found and where the motive for
repression lies.

Little Hans refused to go out into the street because he was afraid of horses. This is the raw material of the case. Which part of it
constitutes the symptoms? Is it his having the fear? Is it his choice of an object for his fear? Is it his giving up his freedom of
movement? Or is it several of these combined? What is the gratification which he renounces? And why does he have to renounce it?

At a first glance one is tempted to reply that the case is not so very obscure. Little Hans's unaccountable fear of horses is the
symptom, and his inability to go out into the streets is an inhibition, a restriction which his ego has imposed on itself so as not to
arouse the anxiety-symptom. The second point is clearly correct; and in the discussion which follows I shall not concern myself any
further with this inhibition. As regards what was presumably the symptom, a superficial acquaintance with the case does not even
disclose its true formulation. For further investigation shows that what he was suffering from was not a vague fear of horses but a
quite definite apprehension that a horse was going to bite him. This idea, indeed, was endeavouring to withdraw from conscious
ness and get itself replaced by an undefined phobia in which only the anxiety and its object still appeared. Was it perhaps this idea
which was the nucleus of his symptom?

We shall not make any headway until we have reviewed the little boy's psychological situation as a whole as it came to light in the
course of analytic treatment. He was at that time in the Oedipus position, with its attendant feelings of jealousy and hostility towards
his father whom nevertheless—except in so far as his mother was the cause of estrangement—he dearly loved. Here, then, we have
a conflict due to ambivalence: a firmly rooted love and a no less well-grounded hatred directed against
¹Freud, "Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy" (1909), Collected Papers, in.

one and the same person. Little Hans's phobia must be an attempt to solve this conflict. Conflicts of this kind due to ambivalence are
very frequent and they can have another typical outcome, in which one of the two conflicting feelings (usually that of affection)
becomes enormously enhanced and the other vanishes. Only the exaggerated degree and compulsive character of the feeling that
remains betray the fact that it is not the sole one in existence but is continually on the alert to keep the opposite feeling under
suppression, and enables us to postulate the operation of a process which we call repression by means of reaction formation (in the
ego). Cases like Little Hans's show no traces of a reaction-formation of this kind. There are clearly different ways of egress from a
conflict of ambivalence.

Meanwhile we have been able to establish another point with certainty. The instinctual impulse which underwent repression in Little
Hans was a hostile one against his father. Proof of this was obtained in his analysis while the idea of the biting horse was being
followed up. Hans had seen a horse fall down and he had also seen a playmate, with whom he was playing at horses, fall down and
hurt himself. Analysis justified the inference that he had a conative impulse that his father should fall down and hurt himself as his
playmate and the horse had done. Moreover, his attitude towards someone's departure on a certain occasion makes it probable that
his wish that his father should be out of the way found a less hesitating expression. But a wish of this sort is tantamount to an
intention of putting the father out of the way oneself—is tantamount, that is, to the murderous impulse which is one component of
the Oedipus complex.

So far there seem to be no connecting links between Little Hans's repressed instinctual impulse and the substitute for it which we
suspect is to be seen in his phobia of horses. Let us simplify his psychological situation by setting on one side the elements of infancy
and ambivalence. Let us imagine that he is a young servant who is in love with the mistress of the house and has received some
tokens of her favour. He hates his master, who is more powerful than he, and he would like to have him out of the way. It would then
be eminently natural for him to be afraid of his master and to dread his vengeance—just as Little Hans was frightened of horses. We
cannot, therefore, describe the anxiety belonging to this phobia as a symptom. If Little Hans, being in love with his mother, had
shown fear of his father, we should have no right to say that he had a neurosis or a phobia. His emotional reaction would have been
entirely comprehensible. What made it a neurosis was one thing alone: the replacement of his father by a horse. It is this
displacement, then, which has a claim to be called a symptom, and which, incidentally, constitutes the alternative mechanism which
enables a conflict due to ambivalence to be re solved without the aid of a reaction-formation. Such a displacement is made possible
or facilitated at Little Hans's early age because the inborn traces of totemistic thought can still be easily revived. Children do not as
yet recognize or, at any rate, lay such exaggerated stress upon the gulf that separates human beings from the animal world. In their
eyes the grown man, the object of their fear and admiration, still belongs to the same category as the big animal who has so many
enviable attributes but against whom they have been warned because he may become dangerous. As we see, the conflict of
ambivalence is not dealt with in relation to one and the same person; it is circumvented, as it were, by one of the pair of conflicting
impulses being directed to a vicarious figure.
So far everything is clear. But the analysis of Little Hans's phobia has been very disappointing in one respect. The distortion which
constituted the symptom-formation was not applied to the psychical representative (the ideational content) of the instinctual
impulse that was to be repressed; it was applied to a quite different representative and one which only corresponded to a reaction to
the disagreeable instinct. It would be more in accordance with our expectations if Little Hans had developed, instead of a fear of
horses, an inclination to ill-treat them and to beat them or if he had expressed in strong terms a wish to see them fall down or to be
hurt or even die in agony ("make a row with their feet"). Something of the sort did in fact emerge in his analysis, but it was not by
any means in the forefront of his neurosis. And, curiously enough, if he really had produced an animosity of this sort not against his
father but against horses as his main symptom, we should not have said that he was suffering from a neurosis. There must be
something amiss either with our view of repression or with our definition of a symptom. One thing strikes us at once: if little Hans
had really behaved in such a way to horses it would mean that repression had in no way altered the character of his objection able
and aggressive impulses themselves but only the object against which they were directed. Undoubtedly there are cases in which this
is all that repression does. But more than this has happened in the development of Little Hans's phobia—how much more can be
guessed from another analysis.

As we know, Little Hans alleged that what he was afraid of was that a horse would bite him. Now sometime later I was able to learn
something about the origin of another animal phobia. In this instance the dreaded animal was a wolf; it, too, had the significance of
a father-substitute.¹ As a boy the patient in question—a Russian whom I did not analyse until he had reached his thirties—had had a
dream (whose meaning was revealed in analysis) and immediately after it had developed a fear of being eaten up by a wolf, like the
seven little goats in the fairy tale. In the case of Little Hans, the ascertained fact that his father used to play at horses with him
doubtless determined his choice of a horse as his anxiety animal. In the same way it appeared at least highly probable that the father
of my Russian patient used, when playing with him, to pretend to be a wolf and jokingly threaten to eat him up. Since then I have
come across a third instance. The patient was a young American who came to me for treatment. True, he had not developed an
actual animal phobia, but it was precisely because of this omission that his case helped to throw light upon the other two. As a child
he had been sexually excited by a fantastic children's story which had been read aloud to him about an Arab chief who pursued a
gingerbread man so as to eat him up. He identified himself with this edible person, and the Arab chief was easily recognizable as a
father substitute. This phantasy formed the substratum of his auto-erotic phantasies.

The idea of being devoured by the father is typical, age-old and common to all children. It has familiar parallels in mythology (the
myth of Cronos) and in the animal kingdom. Yet in spite of this, such an idea is so strange to us that we can hardly credit its existence
in a child. Nor do we know whether it really means what it seems to, and we cannot understand how it can have become the subject
matter of a phobia. Analytic observation sup plies the requisite information. It shows that the idea of being eaten by the father gives
¹Freud, "From the History of an Infantile Neurosis" (1918), Collected Papers, in.

expression, in a form that has undergone regressive degradation, to a passive, tender impulse to be loved by him in a genital-erotic
way.

Further research into the case-history of the Wolf Man leaves no doubt of the correctness of this explanation. The genital impulse, it
is true, betrays no sign of its tender inclination when it is expressed in the language belonging to that transition phase between the
oral and sadistic organization of the libido which has been left behind. Besides, is it merely a question of the replacement of a
particular psychical representative by a regressive form of expression, or is it a question of the genuine regressive degradation of a
genitally orientated impulse in the id? It is not at all easy to make certain. The case-history of the Wolf Man gives very definite
support to the second, more serious, view, for, from the time of the decisive dream onward, the boy became naughty, tormenting,
and sadistic, and soon after developed a regular obsessional neurosis. At any rate we can see that repression is not the only means
which the ego can employ for the purpose of defence against an unwelcome instinctual impulse. If it succeeds in making an instinct
regress, it will actually have done it much more injury than it could have by repressing it. Sometimes, indeed, after forcing an instinct
to regress in this way,-it goes on to repress it.

The case of the Wolf Man and the somewhat less complicated one of Little Hans raise a number of further considerations. But we
already learn two unexpected facts. There can be no doubt that the instinctual impulse which was repressed in both phobias was a
hostile one against the father. One might say that that impulse had been repressed by being reversed. Instead of aggressiveness
towards the father there appeared aggressiveness from the father in the shape of revenge. Since this aggressive ness is in any case
rooted in the sadistic phase of the libido, a certain degree of degradation of it is all that is needed to reduce it to the oral stage. This
stage, while only adumbrated in Little Hans's fear of being bitten, was blatantly exhibited in the Wolf Man's terror of being devoured.
But, besides this, the analysis has demonstrated, beyond a shadow of a doubt, the presence of another instinctual impulse of an
opposite nature which had succumbed to repression. This was a loving, passive impulse directed towards the father, which had
already attained the genital (phallic) level of libidinal organization. As regards the final outcome of the process of repression, this
impulse seems, indeed, to have been the more important of the two; it underwent a more far-reaching regression and had a decisive
influence upon the content of the phobia. In following up a single current of instinctual repression, we have thus come upon a
confluence of two. The two instinctual impulses that have been overtaken by repression—sadistic aggressiveness towards the father
and passive affection for him—form a pair of opposites. Furthermore, a full comprehension of Little Hans's case shows that the
formation of his phobia had had the effect of abolishing his affectionate object-cathexis of his mother as well, though the actual
content of his phobia betrayed no sign of it. The process of repression had attacked almost all the components of his Oedipus
complex—both his hostile and his tender impulses towards his father and his tender impulses towards his mother. In my Russian
patient, this state of affairs was much less patent.

These are unwelcome complications, considering that we only set out to study simple cases of symptom-formation and with that
intention selected the earliest and, to all appearances, most transparent neuroses of childhood. Instead of a single repression we
have found a collection of them and have become involved with regression into the bargain. Perhaps we have added to the confusion
by treating the two cases of animal phobia at our disposal— Little Hans and the Wolf Man—as though they were cast in the same
mould. As a matter of fact, certain differences between them stand out. It is only with regard to Little Hans that we can positively
assert that what his phobia disposed of were the two main impulses of the Oedipus complex, viz., his aggressiveness towards his
father and his over-fondness for his mother. A tender feeling for his father was undoubtedly there too and played a part in repressing
the opposite feeling; but we can prove neither that it was strong enough to draw repression upon itself nor that it subsided after his
phobia appeared. Hans seems, in fact, to have been a normal boy with what is called a positive Oedipus complex. It is possible that
those factors which seem not to have been present were actually at work in him, but we cannot demonstrate their existence. Even
the most exhaustive analysis has gaps in its data and is insufficiently documented. In the case of the Wolf Man something different is
lacking. His attitude to female objects had been disturbed by an early seduction, and his passive, feminine side was strongly
developed. The analysis of his wolf-dream revealed very little intentional aggressiveness towards his father, but it brought forward
unmistakable proof that his passive tender attitude to his father had been overtaken by repression. In his case, too, the other factors
may have been operative as well; but they were not visible. Howis it that, whereas these differences between the two cases almost
amount to an antithesis, the final outcome—a phobia—was approximately the same? The answer must be sought in another quarter.
I think it will be found in the second fact which emerges from our brief comparative examination. It seems to me that in both cases
we can detect what the motive force of the repression was and can substantiate our view of its nature from the line of development
which the two children subsequently pursued. This motive force was identical in both. It was the fear of impending castration. Little
Hans gave up his aggressiveness towards his father from fear of being castrated. His fear that a horse would bite him can easily be
extended into meaning a fear that a horse would bite off his genitals, would castrate him. But it was from fear of being castrated, too,
that the little Russian relinquished his desire to be loved by his father, for he thought that a relation of that sort presupposed a
sacrifice of his genitals—of the organ which distinguished him from women. As we see, both forms of the Oedipus complex, the
normal, active form and the inverted one, are broken down by the castration complex. The Russian boy's anxiety idea of being eaten
up by a wolf contained, it is true, no suggestion of castration, for the oral regression it had undergone had removed it too far from
the phallic stage. But the analysis of his dream rendered further proof superfluous. It was a triumph of repression that the form in
which his phobia was expressed should no longer have contained any allusion to castration.

So now we have made the unexpected discovery that in both patients the motive force of the repression was a fear of castration. The
ideational content of their anxiety—being bit ten by a horse and being eaten up by a wolf— was a substitute by distortion for the
idea of being castrated by their father. It was this idea which had undergone repression. In the Russian boy the idea was an
expression of a desire which was not able to subsist in the face of his masculine revolt; in Little Hans it was the expression of a
reaction in him which had turned his aggressiveness into its opposite. But the affect of anxiety, which was the essence of their
phobia, came, not from the process of repression, not from the libidinal cathexes of the repressed impulses, but from the repressing
agency itself. The anxiety belonging to the animal phobias was an untransformed fear of castration. It was therefore an objective fear,
a fear of a danger which actually was imminent or believed to be so. It was anxiety which produced repression, and not, as I formerly
believed, repression which produced anxiety.

I cannot deny the fact, though it is not pleasant to recall it, that I have on many occasions asserted that in repression the psychical
representative of the instinct is distorted, displaced, etc., while the libido belonging to the instinctual impulse is transformed into
anxiety. But now an examination of phobias, which should be best able to provide confirmatory evidence, fails to bear out my
assertion. The anxiety felt in animal phobias is the castration anxiety of the ego; while the anxiety felt in agoraphobia (a subject that
has been less thoroughly studied) seems to be a fear of incurring sexual temptation—a fear which, after all, must be connected in its
origins with the fear of castration. As far as can be seen at present, the majority of phobias go back to an anxiety of this kind felt by
the ego in regard to the demands of the libido. It is always the ego's attitude of anxiety which is the primary thing and which sets
repression going. Anxiety never arises from repressed libido. If I had formerly been content to say that after the occurrence of
repression there appeared, in place of the manifestation of libido that was to be expected, a certain amount of anxiety, I should have
nothing to retract today. The description would be correct; and there does undoubtedly exist a correspondence of the kind asserted
between the strength of the impulse that has to be repressed and the intensity of the resultant anxiety. But I must admit that I
thought I was giving more than a mere description. I believed I had put my finger on a meta-psychological process of direct
transformation of libido into anxiety. I can now no longer maintain this view. And, indeed, I found it impossible at the time to explain
how a transformation of that kind was carried out.

It may be asked how I arrived at this idea of transformation in the first instance. It was while I was studying the actual neuroses, at a
time when analysis was still a very long way from distinguishing between processes in the ego and processes in the id. I found that
out breaks of anxiety and a general state of anxiety preparedness were produced by certain sexual practices such as coitus
interruptus, undischarged sexual excitement, or enforced abstinence—that is, whenever sexual excitement was inhibited, arrested,
or deflected in its progress towards gratification. Since sexual excitement was an expression of libidinal instinctual impulses, it did not
seem too rash to assume that the libido was turned into anxiety through the agency of these disturbances. The observations which I
made at the time still hold good. Moreover, it cannot be denied that the libido belonging to the id-processes is subjected to
interruption at the instigation of repression. We can still maintain, therefore, that in repression anxiety is produced from the libidinal
cathexes of the instinctual impulses. But how can we reconcile this conclusion with our other conclusion that the anxiety felt in
phobias is an ego anxiety and arises in the ego, and that it does not proceed out of repression but, on the contrary, sets repression in
motion? There seems to be a contradiction here which is not at all simple to solve. It will not be easy to reduce the two sources of
anxiety to a single one. We might attempt to do so by supposing that, when coitus is disturbed or sexual excitement interrupted or
abstinence enforced, the ego scents certain dangers to which it reacts with anxiety. But this takes us nowhere. On the other hand,
our analysis of the phobias seems to admit of no correction. Non liquet.¹

                                                               CHAPTER V

We set out to study the formation of symptoms and the secondary struggle waged by the ego against symptoms. But in picking on
the pho bias for this purpose we have clearly made an unlucky choice. The anxiety which predominates in them appears to
complicate and obscure the picture. There are plenty of neuroses which exhibit no anxiety whatever. True conversion-hysteria is one
of these. Even in its most severe symptoms no admixture of anxiety is found. This fact alone ought to warn us against making too
close a connection between anxiety and symptom-formation. The phobias are so closely akin to conversion-hysteria in every other
respect that I have felt justified in classing them with it under the name of anxiety-hysteria. But no one has as yet been able to say
what it is that determines whether any given case shall take the form of a conversion
¹It is not clear.—ED.

hysteria or a phobia—has been able, that is to say, to establish how the production of anxiety in hysteria is conditioned.

The commonest symptoms of conversion hysteria— motor paralyses, contractures, in voluntary actions or discharges, pains, and
hallucinations—are cathectic processes which are either permanently maintained or intermit tent. But this puts fresh difficulties in
the way. Not much is actually known about these symptoms. Analysis can show what the disturbed excitatory process is which the
symptoms re place. It usually turns out that they themselves have a share in that process. It is as though they had concentrated in
themselves the whole energy of the process. For instance, it will be found that the pains from which a patient suffers were present in
the situation in which the repression occurred; or that his hallucination was, at that time, a perception; or that his motor paralysis
stands for a defence against an action which he had meant to perform but which had been inhibited; or that his contracture is usually
a displacement of an intended innervation of the muscles in some other part of his body; or that his convulsions are the equivalent
of an outburst of affect which has been withdrawn from the normal control of the ego. The sensation of unpleasure which ac
companies the appearance of the symptoms varies in a striking degree. In chronic symptoms which have been displaced on to
motility, like paralyses and contractures, it is almost always entirely absent; the ego behaves towards the symptoms as though it had
nothing to do with them. In intermittent symptoms and in those concerned with the sensory field, unpleasure is as a rule distinctly
felt; and in symptoms of pain it may reach an extreme degree. The picture presented is so manifold that it is difficult to discover the
factor which permits of all these variations and yet establishes a uniformity in them. There is, moreover, little to be seen in
conversion-hysteria of the ego's struggle against the symptom after it has been formed. It is only when sensitivity to pain in some
part of the body constitutes the symptom that that symptom is in a position to play a dual role. In that case the symptom of pain will
appear no less regularly whenever the part of the body concerned is touched from outside than when the pathogenic situation
which it represents is associatively activated from within; and the ego will take precautions to prevent the symptom from being
aroused through external perceptions. Why the formation of symptoms in conversion-hysteria should be such a peculiarly obscure
thing I do not know; but the fact pro vides us with a good reason for quitting such an unproductive field of enquiry.
Let us turn to the obsessional neuroses in the hope of learning more about the formation of symptoms. The symptoms belonging to
this neurosis fall, in general, into two groups, each having an opposite bias. They are either prohibitions, precautions and
expiations—that is, negative in character—or they are substitutive gratifications often appearing in symbolic disguise. The negative,
defensive group of symptoms is the more primary of the two; but as the illness is prolonged the gratificatory group, overriding all
defensive measures, gains the upper hand. The symptom-formation scores a triumph if it succeeds in combining the two by joining to
what was originally a defensive command or prohibition the significance of a gratification; and in order to achieve this end it will
often make use of the most ingenious associative paths. Such an achievement demonstrates the tendency of the ego to
synthetization which it has already been seen to possess. In extreme cases the patient manages to make most of his symptoms have,
in addition to their original meaning, a directly contrary one. This is a tribute to the power of ambivalence, which, no one knows why,
plays such a large part in obsessional neuroses. In the crudest instance the symptom has two phases: an action which carries out a
certain injunction is immediately succeeded by another action which stops or undoes the first one, even if it does not go quite so far
as to carry out its opposite.

Two impressions at once emerge from this brief survey of obsessional symptoms. The first is that a ceaseless struggle is being waged
against the repressed, in which the repressing forces steadily lose ground; the second is that the ego and the super-ego have a
specially large share in the formation of the symptoms.

Obsessional neurosis is unquestionably the most interesting and repaying subject of analytic research. But as a problem it has not yet
been mastered. It must be confessed that, if we endeavour to penetrate more deeply into its nature, we still have to rely upon
doubtful assumptions and unconfirmed suppositions. Obsessional neurosis originates, no doubt, in the same situation as hysteria,
namely, the necessity of warding off the libidinal demands of the Oedipus complex. Indeed, every obsessional neurosis seems to
have a substratum of hysterical symptoms that have been formed at a very early stage. But it is subsequently shaped along quite
different lines owing to a constitutional factor. The genital organization of the libido turns out to be weak and insufficiently resistant,
so that when the ego begins its defensive actions the first thing it succeeds in doing is to throw back, in part or altogether, the genital
organization (of the phallic phase) on to the earlier sadistic-anal level. This phenomenon of regression is decisive for all that follows.

Another possibility has to be considered. Perhaps regression is the result not of a constitutional factor but of a time-factor. It may be
that regression is rendered possible not because the genital organization of the libido is too weak, but because the opposition of the
ego begins too early, while the sadistic phase is at its height. I am not prepared to express an absolute opinion on this point, but I
may say that analytic observation does not speak in favour of such an assumption. It rather tends to show that by the time an
obsessional neurosis begins to show itself the phallic stage has already been attained. Moreover, the onset of this neurosis belongs
to a later time of life than that of hysteria. It sets in in the second period of childhood, with the latency period. In a patient whose
case I was able to study and who was overtaken by this disorder at a very late date, it became clear that the determining cause of his
regression and of the emergence of his obsessional neurosis was a real occurrence that impaired a genital life which had up till then
been intact.

As regards a meta-psychological explanation of regression I am inclined to find it in a defusion of instinct, in a detachment of the
erotic components which, at the beginning of the genital stage, had become joined to the destructive cathexes belonging to the
sadistic phase.

In bringing regression about, the ego scores the first point in its defensive struggle against the demands of the libido. In this
connection we shall find it advantageous to distinguish the more general notion of defence from repression. Repression is only one
of the mechanisms which defence makes use of. It is perhaps in obsessional cases more than in normal or hysterical ones that we can
most clearly recognize that the motive force of defence is the castration com plex and that what is being warded off are the trends of
the Oedipus complex. We are at present dealing with the beginning of the latency period, a period which is characterized by the
passing away of the Oedipus complex, the creation or consolidation of the super-ego and the erection of ethical and aesthetic
barriers in the ego. In obsessional neuroses, these processes are carried further than is normal. In order to effect the destruction of
the Oedipus complex, a regressive degradation of the libido takes place as well, the super-ego becomes exceptionally severe and
unkind, and the ego, in obedience to the super-ego, produces strong reaction-formations in the shape of conscientious ness, pity,
and cleanliness. Implacable, though not therefore always successful, severity is shown in putting down the temptation to continue
early infantile masturbation which is now attached to regressive (sadistic-anal) ideational images but which still represents the unsub
jugated part of the phallic organization. There is an inherent contradiction about this state of affairs, in which, precisely in the
interests of masculinity (castration anxiety), every activity belonging to masculinity is stopped. But here, too, obsessional neurosis is
only overdoing the normal method of abolishing the Oedipus complex. We once more find an illustration of the truth that every
exaggeration contains the seed of its own destruction. For, under the guise of obsessional acts, the masturbation that has been
suppressed approaches ever more closely to gratification.
The reaction-formations in the ego of the obsessional neurotic, which we have recognized as exaggerations of normal character-
formation, should be regarded, I think, as yet another mechanism of defence and placed on the same level as regression and
repression. They seem to be absent or very much weaker in hysteria. Looking back, we can now get an idea of what is peculiar to the
defensive process in hysteria. It seems that in it the process is limited to repression alone. The ego turns away from the disagreeable
instinctual impulse and leaves it to pursue its course in the unconscious, taking no further part in its lot. This view cannot be
absolutely correct, for we are acquainted with the case in which a hysterical symptom is at the same time a fulfilment of a penalty
imposed by the super-ego; but it may describe a general characteristic of the behaviour of the ego in hysteria.

We can either simply accept it as a fact that in obsessional neurosis a super-ego of this severe kind emerges, or we can take the
regression of the libido as the fundamental characteristic of the affection and attempt to relate the severity of the super-ego to it.
And indeed, the super ego, originating as it does in the id, cannot dissociate itself from the regression and defusion of instinct which
have taken place there. We cannot be surprised if it becomes harsher, unkinder, and more tormenting than where development has
been normal.

The chief task during the latency period seems to be the warding off of the temptation to masturbate. This struggle produces a series
of symptoms which appear in a typical fashion in the most different individuals and which bear the general character of ceremonial.
It is a great pity that no one has as yet collected them and systematically analysed them. Being the earliest products of the neurosis,
they should best be able to shed light on the mechanisms employed in its symptom-formation. They already exhibit those features
which are destined to come to the fore so fatefully in the serious illness that lies ahead—the manner in which the symptoms are
introduced into certain procedures (which later on become almost automatic) in connection with going to sleep, washing, dressing,
and walking about, as well as the tendency to repetition and delay. Why this should be so is at present not at all clear; but the
sublimation of anal-erotic components plays an unmistakable part.

The advent of puberty opens a new chapter in the history of an obsessional neurosis. The organization at the genital level which has
been stopped in childhood starts again with great vigour. But, as we know, the sexual development of the child determines what
direction this new start will take. Not only will the early aggressive impulses be reawakened; but a greater or lesser proportion of the
new libidinal impulses—in bad cases the whole of them— will have to follow the course prescribed for them by regression and will
emerge as aggressive and destructive tendencies. In consequence of the erotic trends being disguised in this way and owing to the
powerful reaction-formations in the ego, the struggle against sexuality will henceforward be carried on under the banner of ethical
principles. The ego will recoil with astonishment from promptings to cruelty and violence which enter consciousness from the id, and
it has no notion that in them it is combating erotic wishes, including many which it would otherwise not have taken exception to. The
super-ego, overstrict as it is, insists all the more strongly on the suppression of sexuality, seeing that the latter has assumed such
repulsive forms. Thus in obsessional neurosis the conflict is aggravated in two directions: the defensive forces become more
intolerant and the forces that are to be kept off more intolerable. Both effects are due to one factor, namely, regression of the libido.

Much of what has been said may be objected to on the ground that the unpleasant obsessive ideas are themselves conscious. But
there is no doubt that before becoming conscious they have been through a process of repression. In most of them the actual text of
the aggressive instinctual impulse is altogether unknown to the ego, and it requires a good deal of analytic work to make it
conscious. What does penetrate into consciousness is usually only a distorted substitute which is either of a vague, dreamlike, and
confused nature, or so travestied as to be unrecognizable. Even where repression has not encroached upon the content of the
aggressive impulse, it has certainly abolished its accompanying affective quality, with the result that the aggressiveness appears to
the ego not to be an impulsion but, as the patients them selves say, merely an idea which awakens no feeling. But the remarkable
thing is that this is not the case. What happens is that the affect which has been left out when the obsessional idea is perceived
appears in a different place. The super-ego behaves as though repression had not occurred and as though it knew the real
formulation and full affective quality of the aggressive impulse, and it treats the ego accordingly. The ego which, on the one hand,
knows that it is innocent must, on the other, accept a sense of guilt and carry a responsibility which it cannot account for. This state
of affairs is, however, not so puzzling as it would seem at first sight. The behaviour of the super-ego is perfectly intelligible, and the
contradiction in the ego merely shows that it has shut out the id by means of repression while remaining fully accessible to the
influence of the super ego.¹ If it is asked why the ego does not also attempt to withdraw itself from the painful criticism of the super-
ego, the simple answer is that it does manage to do so in a great number of instances. There are obsessional neuroses in which no
sense of guilt whatever is present. In them, as far as can be seen, the ego has avoided becoming aware of it by instituting a new set
of symptoms, penances, or restrictions of a self-punishing kind. These symptoms represent at the same time a gratification of
masochistic impulses which, in their turn, have been reinforced by regression.

Obsessional neurosis presents such a vast
¹Cf. Theodor Reik, Gestandniszwang und Strafbedurfnis, 1925, p. 51.
multiplicity of phenomena that we have never yet succeeded in making a coherent synthesis of all its variations. All we can do is to
pick out certain typical correlations; but there is always the risk that we may have overlooked other uniformities of a no less
important kind.

I have already described the general tendency of symptom-formation in obsessional neurosis. It is to give ever greater room to
substitutive gratification at the expense of frustration. Symptoms which once stood for a restriction of the ego come later on to
represent gratifications as well, thanks to the ego's inclination to synthetize, and it is quite clear that this second meaning gradually
becomes the more important of the two. The result of this process, which approximates more and more to a complete failure of the
original purpose of defence, is an extremely restricted ego which is reduced to seeking gratification in the symptoms. The
displacement of the distribution of forces in favour of gratification may have the alarming outcome of paralysing the will of the ego,
so that in every decision that it has to make it is almost as strongly impelled from the one side as from the other. The acute conflict
between id and super-ego which has dominated the illness from the very beginning may assume such extensive proportions that the
ego, unable to carry out its office of mediator, can undertake nothing which is not drawn into the sphere of that conflict.

                                                               CHAPTER VI

In the course of these struggles, two activities of the ego of a symptom-forming kind are observable, which deserve special attention
because they are obviously surrogates of repression and therefore well suited to illustrate its purpose and technique. The fact that
such auxiliary and substitutive techniques emerge may argue that true repression has met with difficulties in its functioning. If one
considers how much more the ego is the scene of action of symptom-formation in obsessional neurosis than it is in hysteria and with
what tenacity it clings to its relations to reality, employing all its intellectual faculties to that end—so much so that the very process
of thinking becomes hyper-cathected and eroticized—then one may perhaps get a closer idea of the importance of these variations
of repression.

The two techniques I refer to are undoing what has been done and isolating. The first of these has a wide range of application and
goes back very far. It is, as it were, a negative magic, and endeavours, by means of motor symbolism, to "blow away" not merely the
consequence of some occurrence, experience, or impression, but those very events themselves. I choose the term "blow away"
advisedly, so as to remind the reader of the part played by this technique not only in neuroses but in magical acts, popular customs,
and religious ceremonies as well. In obsessional neurosis we first come across the technique of undoing what has been done in
symptoms which occur in two phases—dichro-nous symptoms—in which one action is can celled out by a second, so that it is as
though neither action had taken place, whereas, in reality, both have. This aim of undoing is the second underlying motive of
obsessional ceremonials, the first being to take precautions in order to prevent the occurrence or recurrence of some given event.
The difference between the two is easily seen: the precautionary measures are rational, whilst the measures taken to abolish
something by undoing it are irrational and magical. It is of course to be suspected that the latter is the earlier motive of the two and
proceeds from an animistic attitude towards the environment. This endeavour to undo shades off into normal behaviour in the case
in which a person decides to regard an event as not having happened. But whereas he will take no direct steps against the event, and
will simply look away from it and its consequences, the neurotic person will try to make the past itself non-existent. He will try to
repress it by motor means. The same aim may perhaps be present in and account for the compulsion to repeat actions which is so
frequently met with in obsessional neuroses and which serves a number of contradictory purposes at once. When anything has not
happened in the desired way, it can be undone by being repeated in a different way; and now all the motives that exist for lingering
over such repetitions come into play as well. As the neurosis proceeds, we often find that one symptom forming motive of first-rate
importance is the endeavour to undo a traumatic experience. We thus unexpectedly discover a new, motor technique of defence, or
(as we may say in this case with less inaccuracy) of repression.

The second of these techniques that we are setting out to describe for the first time, that of isolation, is characteristic for obsessional
neurosis. It, too, takes place in the motor sphere. When the subject has done something which has a significance for his neurosis, or
after something unpleasant has happened, he will interpolate an interval during which nothing further may happen—during which
he may perceive nothing and do nothing. This be haviour, which seems so strange at first sight, is soon seen to have a relation to
repression. We know that in hysteria a traumatic-experience is able to be overtaken by amnesia. In obsessional neurosis this can
often not be achieved. But, instead of being forgotten, the experience is deprived of its affect, and its as sociative connections are
suppressed or interrupted so that it remains as though isolated and is not reproduced in the ordinary processes of thought. The
effect of isolation is thus the same as the effect of repression with amnesia. This technique is, then, carried out in the isolations of
obsessional neurosis. It is at the same time reinforced in a magical sense from the motor sphere. The elements that are held apart in
this way are precisely those which belong together associatively. Motor isolation is meant to ensure an interruption of the
connection in thought. The normal phenomenon of concentration provides a pretext for this kind of neurotic procedure. The normal
person concentrates on what seems to him important in the way of an impression or a piece of work in order that it shall not be
interfered with by the intrusion of any other mental processes or activities. But even he uses concentration to keep away not only
what is irrelevant or unimportant to the matter in hand, but, above all, what is unsuitable because it is contradictory. He is most
disturbed by those elements which once belonged to it but which have been discarded in the course of his development—as, for
instance, by any manifestation of the ambivalence belonging to his father complex in his relation to God, or by any impulses attached
to his excretory organs in his emotions of love. Thus, in the normal course of things, the ego has a great deal of isolating work to do
in its function of directing the current of thought. And, as we know, in carrying out our analytic technique we have to train it to
relinquish that function, eminently justified as it is in itself, for the time being.

All analysts have found that it is especially difficult for the obsessional neurotic to carry out the fundamental rule of psycho-analytic
treatment. Probably his ego is more watchful and makes sharper isolations because of the high degree of tension due to conflict that
exists between his super-ego and his id. While his thoughts are working, his ego has to keep off too much in the way of an intrusion
of unconscious phantasies or a manifestation of ambivalent trends. It must not relax, but is constantly prepared for a struggle. It
fortifies its compulsion to concentrate and to isolate by the help of those magical acts of isolation which, in the form of symptoms,
grow to be so notice able and to have so much practical importance for the patient, but which are actually, of course, useless and in
the nature of ceremonials.

But in thus endeavouring to prevent associations and connections of thought, the ego is obeying one of the oldest and most
fundamental commands of obsessional neurosis, the taboo of touching. If one asks oneself why the avoidance of touching, contact,
or contamination should play such a large part in this neurosis and should become the subject-matter of complicated systems, the
answer is that touching and physical contact are the immediate aim of the aggressive as well as the loving object-cathexes. Eros
desires contact because it strives to make the ego and the loved object one, to abolish all barriers of distance between them. But the
first requisite of destructiveness, too, which (before the invention of long-range weapons) can only take effect at close quarters, is
physical contact, a coming to grips. To touch a woman has become a euphemism for using her as a sexual object. No to touch one's
genitals is the phrase employed for forbidding auto-erotic gratification. Since obsessional neurosis begins by persecuting touching in
its erotic sense and then, after regression has taken place, goes on to persecute it in its new sense of aggressiveness, nothing is so
strongly proscribed in this illness as touching nor so well suited to become the central point of a system of prohibitions. Now, to
isolate a thing is to banish the possibility of its being touched, to withdraw it from any sort of contact. When a neurotic isolates an
impression or an activity by interpolating an interval, he lets it be understood symbolically that he will not allow his thoughts about
that impression or activity to come into associative contact with his other thoughts.

This is as far as our investigations into the formation of symptoms take us. It is hardly worth while summing them up, for the results
they have yielded are scanty and incomplete and tell us scarcely anything that we do not already know. It would be fruitless to turn
our attention to symptom-formation in other dis orders besides phobias, conversion-hysteria, and obsessional neurosis, for too little
is known about them. But in reviewing those three neuroses together we are brought up against a very serious problem the
consideration of which can no longer be put off. All three have as their starting-point the destruction of the Oedipus complex; and in
all three the motive force of the ego's opposition is, we believe, the fear of castration. Yet it is only in the phobias that this fear
comes to the surface and is acknowledged as such. What has become of it in the other two neuroses? How has the ego spared itself
this fear? The problem becomes accentuated when we recollect the possibility, already referred to, that anxiety arises directly, by a
kind of fermentation, as it were, from a libidinal cathexis whose processes have been disturbed. Furthermore, is it absolutely certain
that fear of castration is the only motive force of repression or defence? If we think of neuroses in women we are bound to doubt it.
For though we can with certainty establish in them the presence of a castration complex, we can hardly speak with propriety of
castration anxiety where castration has already taken place.

                                                              CHAPTER VII

Let us go back again to infantile phobias of animals; for we still know more about them than any others. In animal phobias, then, the
ego has to oppose a libidinal object-cathexis coming from the id—a cathexis that belongs either to the positive or the negative
Oedipus complex—because it believes that to give way to it would entail the danger of castration. This question has already been
discussed, but there still remains a doubtful point to clear up. In Little Hans's case—that is, in the case of a positive Oedipus
complex—was it his fondness for his mother or was it his aggressiveness to wards his father which called out the defence of the ego?
In practice it seems to make no difference, especially as each set of feelings implies the other; but the question has a theoretical
interest, since it is only the feeling of affection for the mother which can count as a purely erotic one. The aggressive impulse flows
mainly from the instinct of destruction; and we have always believed that in a neurosis it is against the demands of the libido and not
against those of any other instinct that the ego is defending itself. In point of fact we know that, after Hans's phobia had been
formed, his tender attachment to his mother seemed to disappear, having been completely disposed of by repression, while the
symptom-formation (substitutive formation) took place in relation to his aggressive impulses. In the Wolf Man the situation was
simpler. The impulse that was repressed was his feminine attitude towards his father, and that attitude was a genuinely erotic one.
And it was in relation to that impulse, too, that the formation of his symptoms took place.

It is almost humiliating that, after working so long, we should still be having difficulty in understanding the most fundamental facts.
But we are determined to simplify nothing and to hide nothing. If we cannot see things clearly, we will at least see clearly what the
obscurities are. What is hampering us here is evidently some hitch in the development of our theory of the instincts. We began by
tracing the organization of the libido through its successive stages—from the oral through the sadistic-anal to the genital—and in
doing so placed all the components of the sexual instinct on the same footing. Later it appeared that sadism was the representative
of another instinct which was opposed to Eros. This new view, that the instincts fell into two groups, seems to explode the earlier
view of the successive stages of libidinal organization. But we do not have to break fresh ground in order to find a way out of the
difficulty. The solution has been at hand for a long time and consists in the fact that what we are concerned with are scarcely ever
pure instinctual impulses but mixtures in various proportions of the two groups of instincts. If this is so, there is no need to revise our
view of the organizations of the libido. A sadistic cathexis of an object may legitimately claim to be treated as a libidinal one; and an
aggressive impulse against the father can just as well be subjected to repression as a loving impulse towards the mother.
Nevertheless we shall bear in mind for future consideration the possibility that repression is a process which has a special relation to
the genital organization of the libido and that the ego resorts to other methods of defence when it has to secure itself against the
libido on other levels of organization. A case like Little Hans's does not enable us to come to any clear conclusion. It is true that in
him an aggressive impulse had been disposed of by repression, but this happened after the genital organization had been attained.

This time we will keep our attention on the question of anxiety. We have said that as soon as the ego recognized the danger of
castration it gave the signal of anxiety and inhibited through the pleasure-unpleasure system (in a way which we cannot as yet
understand more fully) the impending cathetic process in the id. At the same time the phobia became formed; and now the
castration anxiety was directed to a different object and expressed in a distorted form, so that the patient was afraid, not of being
castrated by his father, but of being bitten by a horse or eaten by a wolf. This substitutive formation had two obvious advantages. In
the first place it avoided a conflict due to ambivalence (for the father had been a loved object, too), and in the second place it
enabled the ego to cease producing anxiety. For the anxiety belonging to a phobia is conditional; it only emerges when the object of
it is perceived, and rightly so, since it is only then that the danger-situation is present. There is no need to be afraid of being
castrated by a father who is not there. On the other hand, one cannot get rid of a father; he can appear when ever he chooses. But if
he is replaced by an animal, all one has to do is to avoid the sight of it—that is, its presence—in order to be free from danger and
anxiety. Little Hans, therefore, imposed a restriction upon his ego. He produced the inhibition of not leaving the house so as not to
come across any horses. The young Russian had an even easier time of it, for it was hardly a privation for him not to look at a
particular picture-book anymore. If his naughty sister had not always been showing him the book with the picture of the wolf
standing upright in it, he would have been able to feel safe from his fears.

On a previous occasion I have stated that phobias have the character of a projection, in that they replace an internal, instinctual
danger by an external, perceptual one. The advantage of doing this comes from the fact that the in dividual can protect himself
against external dangers by fleeing from them and avoiding the perception of them, whereas it is useless to try to flee from dangers
that arise from within. This statement of mine was not incorrect, but it did not go below the surface of things. For an instinctual
demand is, after all, not dangerous in itself; it only becomes so inasmuch as it entails a real external danger, the danger of castration.
Thus what happens in a phobia in the last resort is merely that one external danger is replaced by another. The view that in a phobia
the ego is able to escape anxiety by means of avoidance or inhibitory symptoms fits in with the theory that that anxiety is only an
affective signal and that no alteration has taken place in the economic situation.

The anxiety felt in animal phobias is, therefore, an affective reaction on the part of the ego to danger; and the danger which is being
signalled in this way is the danger of castration. This anxiety differs in no respect from the anxiety which the ego normally feels in
situations of danger except that its content remains unconscious and only becomes conscious in the form of a distortion.

The same is true, I think, of the phobias of grown-up persons, although the material that undergoes modification in their neuroses is
much more abundant, and there are some additional factors in the formation of the symptoms. Fundamentally the position is
identical. The agoraphobic patient imposes a restriction upon his ego so as to escape a certain instinctual danger, namely, the danger
of giving way to his erotic desires. For, if he did so, the danger of being castrated, or some similar danger, would once more be
conjured up as it was in his childhood. I may cite as an instance the case of a young man who became agoraphobic because he was
afraid of yielding to the solicitations of prostitutes and of contracting a syphilitic infection from them as a punishment.

I am well aware that a great number of cases exhibit a much more complicated structure and that many other repressed instinctual
impulses can enter into a phobia. But they are only tributary streams which have for the most part joined the main current of the
neurosis at a later stage. The symptomatology of agora phobia, for example, is complicated by the fact that the ego does not confine
itself to making a renunciation. In order to rob the situation of danger it does more: it usually effects a temporal regression to
infancy, or, in extreme cases, to pre-natal days, that is, to a time when the individual was in his mother's womb and protected against
the dangers which beset him in the present. A regression of this kind now becomes a condition whose fulfilment exempts the ego
from making its renunciation. For instance, an agoraphobic patient may be able to walk in the street provided he is accompanied, like
a small child, by someone he knows and trusts; or, for the same reason, he may be able to go out alone, provided he remains within
a certain distance of his own house and does not go to places which are not familiar to him or where people do not know him. What
these stipulations are will depend in each case upon the infantile factors which dominate him through his neurosis. The phobia of
being alone is unambiguous in its meaning, irrespective of any infantile regression: it is, ultimately, an endeavour to avoid the
temptation to indulge in solitary masturbation. Naturally, infantile regression can only take place when the in dividual is no longer a
child.

A phobia generally sets in only after a first anxiety attack has been experienced in specific circumstances, such as in the street or in a
train or in solitude. Thereafter the anxiety is held in ban by the phobia, but it re-emerges whenever the protective stipulation cannot
be fulfilled. The mechanism of phobia does good service as a means of defence and tends to be very stable. A continuation of the
defensive struggle, in the shape of a struggle against the symptom, occurs frequently but not invariably.

What has been said about anxiety in phobias is true of obsessional neuroses as well. In this respect it is not difficult for us to put
obsessional neuroses on a level with phobias. In the former, the mainspring of all later symptom formation is clearly the ego's fear of
the super ego. The danger-situation from which the ego must get away is the hostility of the super-ego. There is no trace of
projection here; the danger is completely internalized. But if we ask our selves what it is that the ego fears from the super-ego, we
cannot but think that the punishment threatened by the latter must be an extension of the punishment of castration. Just as the
father has become depersonalized in the shape of the super-ego, so has the fear of castration at his hands become transformed into
an undefined social or moral anxiety. But this anxiety is concealed. The ego escapes it by obediently carrying out the behests,
precautions, and penances that have been enjoined on it. If it is impeded in doing so, it is at once overtaken by an acute feeling of
discomfort which may, I think, be regarded as an equivalent of anxiety and which the patients themselves liken to anxiety.

The conclusion we have come to, then, is this. Anxiety is a reaction to a situation of danger. It is obviated by the ego's doing
something to avoid that situation or to withdraw from it. It might be said that symptoms are created so as to prevent anxiety from
emerging. But this does not go deep enough. It would be truer to say that symptoms are created so as to avoid a danger-situation
whose approach has been signalled by the emergence of anxiety. In the cases that we have discussed, the danger concerned was the
danger of castration or some off-shoot of castration.

If anxiety is a reaction of the ego to danger, we shall be tempted to regard the traumatic neuroses, which so often follow upon a
narrow escape from death, as a direct result of a fear of death (or fear for life) and to dismiss from our minds the question of
castration and the subordinate relations of the ego. Most physicians who observed the traumatic neuroses that occurred during the
great war took this line and triumphantly announced that proof was now forthcoming that a threat to the instinct of self-
preservation could by itself produce a neurosis without any admixture of sexual factors and without requiring any of the complicated
hypotheses of psycho-analysis. It is in fact greatly to be regretted that not a single analysis of a traumatic neurosis of any value is
extant. And it is to be regretted, not because such an analysis would contradict the aetiological importance of sexuality—for any such
contradiction has long since been disposed of by the introduction of the concept of narcissism, which brings the libidinal cathexis of
the ego into line with the cathexes of objects and emphasizes the libidinal character of the instinct of self-preservation—but
because, in the absence of any analyses of this kind we have lost a precious opportunity of making decisive discoveries about the
relations between anxiety and the formation of symptoms. In view of all that we know about the structure of the comparatively
simple neuroses of everyday life, it would seem highly improbable that a neurosis could come into being merely because of the
objective presence of danger without any participation of the deeper levels of the mental apparatus. But the unconscious seems to
contain nothing that would lend substance to the concept of the annihilation of life. Castration can be pictured on the basis of the
daily experience of the faeces being separated from the body or on the basis of losing the mother's breast at weaning. But nothing
resembling death can ever have been experienced; or if it has, as in fainting, it has left no observable traces behind. I am therefore
inclined to adhere to the view that the fear of death should be regarded as analogous to the fear of castration and that the situation
to which the ego is re acting is one of being abandoned by the protecting super-ego—the powers of destiny— so that it has no longer
any safeguard against all the dangers that surround it. In addition, it must be remembered that in those experiences which lead to a
traumatic neurosis the protective barrier against external stimuli has been broken through and over-great quantities of excitation
impinge upon the mental apparatus; so that we have here the second possibility, that anxiety is not only being signalled as an affect
but is also being created anew out of the economic conditions of the situation.
The statement I have just made, to the effect that the ego has been prepared to expect castration by having undergone constantly
repeated object-losses, places the question of anxiety in a new light. We have hitherto regarded it as an affective signal of danger.
But now, since the danger is so often one of castration it appears to us as a reaction to a loss, a separation. Even though many
considerations immediately arise which make against this view, we cannot but be struck by one very remark able correlation. The
first experience of anxiety through which the individual goes is (in the case of human beings, at all events) birth, and, objectively
speaking, birth is a separation from the mother. It can be compared to a castration of the mother (by equating the child with a penis).
Now it would be very satisfactory if anxiety, as a symbol of separation, were to be repeated on every subsequent occasion on which a
separation took place. But unfortunately we are prevented from making use of this correlation by the fact that birth is not
experienced subjectively as a separation from the mother, since the foetus, being a completely narcissistic creature, is totally
unaware of her existence as an object. Another adverse argument is that we know what the affective re actions to separation are:
they are pain and mourning, not anxiety. Incidentally, it may be remembered that in discussing the question of mourning¹ we also
failed to discover why it should be such a painful thing.

                                                               CHAPTER VIII

The time has come to pause and reflect. What we clearly want is some idea of what anxiety really is, some criterion that will enable
us to distinguish true statements about it from false ones. But this is not easy to get. Anxiety is not so simple as all that. Up till now
we have arrived at nothing but contradictory views about it, none of which can, to the unprejudiced eye, be given preference over
the other. I therefore propose to adopt a different procedure. I propose to assemble, quite impartially, all the facts that we do know
about anxiety and to give up the idea of making any immediate synthesis of them.

Anxiety, then, is in the first place something that is felt. We call it an affective state, although we are also ignorant of what an affect
¹"Mourning and Melancholia" (1917), Collected Papers, TV.

is. As a feeling, anxiety has a very marked quality of unpleasure. But that is not the whole of its quality. Not every unpleasure is
anxiety, for there are other sensations, such as tension, pain, or mourning, which have the quality of unpleasure. Thus anxiety must
have other distinctive features besides this quality. Can we succeed in finding out what the differences are between these various
unpleasurable affects?

We can at any rate note one or two things about the feeling of anxiety. Its unpleasurable quality seems to have a character of its
own— something not very obvious, whose presence is difficult to prove yet which is in all likelihood there. But besides having this
special char acter which is difficult to isolate, we notice that anxiety is accompanied by fairly definite physical sensations which can
be referred to particular organs of the body. As we are not concerned here with the physiology of anxiety, we shall content ourselves
with mentioning a few examples of these sensations. The clearest and most frequent ones are those connected with the respiratory
organs and with the heart. They provide evidence that motor innervations, i.e., processes of discharge, play a part in the general
phenomenon of anxiety.

Analysis of anxiety states therefore reveals the existence of (i) a specific quality of un pleasure, (2) acts of discharge, and (3)
perceptions of those- acts. The two last points indicate at once a difference between states of anxiety and other similar states, like
those of mourning and pain. The latter do not have any motor manifestation; or if they have, the manifestation is not an integral part
of the whole state but is distinct from it as being a result of it or a reaction to it. Anxiety, then, is a special state of unpleasure, with
acts of discharge along particular channels. In accordance with our general views we should be inclined to think that anxiety is based
upon an increase of excitation which, on the one hand, produces the quality of unpleasure and, on the other, finds relief through the
channels of discharge mentioned above. But a purely physiological account of this sort is scarcely sufficient. We are tempted to
assume the presence of a historical factor which binds the sensations of anxiety and its innervations firmly together; in other words,
that an anxiety state is the reproduction of some experience which contains the necessary conditions for such an increase of
excitation and a discharge along particular, channels, and that from this circumstance the unpleasure of anxiety receives its specific
character. In man, birth is a prototypic experience of this kind, and one is therefore inclined to regard anxiety states as a reproduction
of the trauma of birth.

This does not imply that anxiety occupies a different position from all the other affective states. In my opinion, the other affects are
also reproductions of very early, perhaps even pre individual, experiences of vital importance; and I should be inclined to regard
them as universal, typical, anil innate hysterical attacks, comparable with the recently and individually acquired attacks which occur
in hysterical neuroses and whose origin and significance as memory symbols have been revealed by analysis. Of course it would be
very desirable to be able to demonstrate the truth of this view in a number of such affects—a thing which is still very far from being
the case.
Certain immediate objections to this view that anxiety goes back to the event of birth have to be met. It may be argued that anxiety
is a reaction which, in all probability, is common to every organism, certainly every organism of a higher order, whereas birth is only
experienced by the mammals; and it is doubtful whether in all of them, even, birth amounts to a trauma. Therefore, there can be
anxiety without the prototype of birth. But this objection takes us beyond the ^barrier that divides psychology from biology. It may
be precisely because anxiety has an indispensable biological function to fulfil as a reaction to a state of danger that it is differently
fashioned in different living beings. We do not know, besides, whether anxiety involves the same sensations and innervations in
creatures far removed from man as it does in man himself. Thus there is no good argument here against the view that, in man,
anxiety is modelled upon the process of birth.

If the structure and origin of anxiety are as described, the next question is: what is the function of anxiety and on what occasions is it
reproduced? The answer seems to be obvious and convincing: anxiety arose originally as a reaction to a state of danger, and it is
reproduced whenever a state of that kind recurs.

This answer, however, raises further considerations. The innervations involved in the original state of anxiety probably had a meaning
and purpose, just as have the muscular movements which accompany a first hysterical attack. In order to understand an hysterical
attack, all one has to do is to look for a situation in which the movements in question would form part of an appropriate and
expedient action. Thus in birth it is probable that the innervations, in being directed to the respiratory organs, are preparing the way
for the activity of the lungs, and that in accelerating the heart beat they are helping to keep the blood free from toxic substances.
Naturally, when the anxiety state is reproduced later on as an affect, it will be lacking in any such expediency, just as the repetitions
of a hysterical attack are. When the individual is placed in a new situation of danger, it may well be quite inexpedient for him to
respond with an anxiety state (which is a reaction to an earlier danger) instead of initiating a reaction which is appropriate to the
present danger. But his behaviour may become expedient once more if he recognizes the danger-situation before it has actually
overtaken him and signals its approach by an outbreak of anxiety. In that case, he can at once get rid of his anxiety by having
recourse to more suitable measures. Thus we see that there are two ways in which anxiety can emerge: in an expedient way, when a
new situation of danger has occurred, or in an expedient way, in order to give a signal and prevent such a situation from occurring.

But what is a danger? In the act of birth there is a real danger to life. We know what this means objectively; but what it means in a
psychological sense we have no idea. The danger of birth has as yet no mental content for the subject. One cannot possibly suppose
that the foetus has any sort of knowledge that its life is in danger of being destroyed. It can only be aware of some vast upheaval in
the economy of its narcissistic libido. Very large quantities of excitation crowd in upon it, giving rise to new sensations of unpleasure,
and many organs acquire an increased cathexis, thus foreshadowing the object-cathexis which will soon set in. What elements in all
this can be considered to be distinctive of a danger-situation?

Unfortunately, far too little is known about the mental constitution of the new-born child to make a direct answer possible. I cannot
even vouch for the validity of the description I have just given. It is easy to say that the baby will repeat its affect of anxiety in every
situation which recalls the event of birth. The important thing to know is what it is that recalls that event and what it is in that event
that is recalled.

All we can do is to examine the occasions on which infants or rather older children show readiness to produce anxiety. In his book on
the trauma of birth,1 Rank has made a determined attempt to establish a relationship between the earliest phobias of children and
the impressions made on them by the event of birth. But I do not think he has been successful. His theory is open to two objections.
In the first place, he assumes that the infant has received certain sensory impressions, in particular of a visual kind, at the time of
birth, the renewal of which can recall to its memory the trauma of birth and thus evoke a reaction of anxiety. This assumption is quite
unfounded and extremely improbable. It is not credible that a child should retain any but tactile and general sensations relating to
the process of birth. If, later on, children show fear of small animals that disappear into holes or emerge from them, this reaction,
according to Rank, is due to their perceiving an analogy. But it is an analogy of which they cannot be aware. In the second place, in
considering these later anxiety-situations Rank dwells, according as it suits him best, now on the child's recollection of its happy
intra-uterine existence, now on its recollection of the traumatic disturbance which interrupted that existence; so that he is able to
make almost any interpretation he pleases. There are, moreover, certain examples of childhood anxiety which directly traverse his
theory. When, for instance, a child is left alone in the dark, one would expect it, according to his view, to welcome the re-
establishment of the intra uterine situation; yet it is precisely on such occasions that the child reacts with anxiety. And if this is
explained by saying that the child is being reminded of the interruption which the event of birth made in its intra-uterine happiness,
then one can no longer shut one's eyes to the far-fetched character of such explanations.

I am driven to the conclusion that the earliest phobias of infancy cannot be directly traced back to impressions of birth and that so
far they have not been explained. A certain preparedness for anxiety is undoubtedly present in the infant. But this preparedness for
anxiety, instead of being at its maximum immediately after birth and then slowly decreasing, does not emerge till later on, as the
mental development of the infant proceeds. It lasts over a certain period of childhood. If the early phobias persist beyond that
period, one is inclined to suspect the presence of a neurotic disturbance,
¹Rank, The Trauma of Birth and Us Importance for Psycho-Analytic Therapy (1924).

although here again it is not at all clear what their relation is to the undoubted neuroses that appear later on in childhood.

Only a few of the manifestations of anxiety in children are comprehensible to us, and we must confine our attention to them. They
occur, for instance, when a child is alone or in the dark, or when it finds itself with an unknown person instead of one to whom it is
used—such as its mother. These three instances can be reduced to a single condition, namely, that of missing someone who is loved
and longed-for.

Here is the key, I think, to an understanding of anxiety and to a reconciliation of the contradictions that seem to beset it. The child's
memory picture of the person longed-for is no doubt intensively cathected, probably in a hallucinatory way at first. But this has no
effect; and now it seems as though the longing turns into anxiety. This anxiety has all the appearance of being an expression of the
child's feeling of not knowing what to do, as though in its still undeveloped state it did not know how to cope with its cathexis of
longing. Here anxiety seems to be a reaction to the felt loss of the object; and one is at once reminded of the fact that castration
anxiety, too, is a fear of being separated from a highly valued object, and that the earliest anxiety of all— the primal anxiety of
birth—is brought about on the occasion of a separation from the mother.

But our next reflection takes us a step beyond this question of loss of object. The reason why the infant in arms wants to perceive the
presence of its mother is only because it already knows by experience that she gratifies all its needs without delay. The situation,
then, that it regards as a danger and against which it wants to be safe-guarded is one of non-gratification, of a growing tension due to
need, against which it is helpless. I think that if we adopt this view all the facts fall into place. The situation of non-gratification in
which the amounts of stimulation rise to an unpleasurable height without the infant being able to master them by utilizing and
discharging them psychologically must be analogous for it to the experience of being born—must be a repetition of that situation of
danger. What both situations have in common is an economic disturbance caused by an accumulation of amounts of stimulation
which require to be disposed of. It is this element which is the real essence of the danger. In both cases the same reaction of anxiety
sets in.

(This anxiety reaction is still an expedient one in the child at the sucking stage, for, just as it activated the lungs of the new-born baby
to get rid of the internal stimuli, so now, in being discharged into the respiratory and vocal muscular apparatus, it calls the mother to
the child's side.) It is unnecessary to suppose that the child carries with it from the time of its birth anything more than this way of
indicating the presence of danger.

When the child has found out by experience that an external, perceptible object can put an end to the dangerous situation which is
reminiscent of birth, the nature of the danger it fears is displaced from the economic situation on to the condition which determined
that situation, viz., the loss of object. It is the absence of the mother that is now the danger; and as soon as that danger arises the
small child gives the signal of anxiety, before the dreaded economic situation has set in. This change constitutes a first important step
forward in the provision made by the child for its self-preservation, and at the same time rep resents a transition from the automatic
and involuntary new-creation of anxiety to the intentional reproduction of anxiety as a signal of danger.

In these two aspects, as an automatic phenomenon and as a rescue-signal, anxiety is seen to be a product of the infant's mental
helplessness which is a natural counterpart of its biological helplessness. The striking coincidence by which the anxiety of the new-
born baby and the anxiety of the infant in arms both depend upon a separation from the mother does not need to be explained on
psychological lines. It can be accounted for simply enough from a biological point of view; for, just as the mother originally satisfied
all the needs of the foetus through her own body, so now, after its birth, she continues to do so, though partly through other means.
There is much more continuity between intra-uterine life and earliest infancy than the impressive caesura of the act of birth allows us
to believe. What happens is that the child's biological situation as a foetus is replaced for it by a psychological object relation to its
mother. But we must not forget that during its intra-uterine life the mother was not an object for the foetus, and that at that time
there were no objects at all as far as it was concerned. It is obvious that in this scheme of things there is no room for the abreaction
of the birth-trauma. We cannot find that anxiety has any other function except that of being a signal for the avoidance of a danger
situation.

The importance of the loss of object as a determinant of anxiety extends considerably further. For the next transformation of anxiety,
viz., the castration anxiety belonging to the phallic phase, is also a fear of separation and is thus attached to the same determinant.
In this case the danger is of being separated from one's genitals. Ferenczi has traced, quite correctly, I think, a clear line of connection
between this fear and the fears contained in the earlier situations of danger. According to him, the high degree of narcissistic value
which the penis possesses is due to the fact that this organ is a guarantee to its owner that he can be once more united to his
mother—i.e., to a substitute for her—in the act of copulation. Being deprived of it amounts to a renewed separation from her and
this in its turn means being helplessly exposed to an unpleasurable tension due to instinctual need, as was the case in birth. But this
need whose increase, is feared is now a specific one belonging to the genital libido and is no longer an indeterminate one, as in the
period of infancy. It may be added that for a man who is impotent (that is, who is inhibited by the threat of castration) the substitute
for copulation is a phantasy of returning into his mother's womb. Following out Ferenczi's line of thought, one might say that such a
man, while endeavouring to return to his mother's womb vicariously—by means of his genital organ, proceeds to replace that organ
regressively by his body as a whole.

The progress which the child makes in its development—its growing independence, the sharper division of its mental apparatus into
several institutions, the advent of new needs— cannot fail to exert an influence upon the content of the danger-situation. We have
already traced the change of that content from loss of the mother as an object to castration. The next change is enforced by the
power of the super-ego. With the depersonalization of the parental institution from which castration was feared, the danger
becomes less defined. Castration anxiety develops into moral anxiety —social anxiety—and it is not so easy now to , know what the
anxiety is about. The formula, separation and expulsion from the horde, only applies to that later portion of the super-ego which has
been formed on the strength of social prototypes, not to the nucleus of the super-ego which corresponds to the introjected parental
institution. Putting it more generally, what the ego regards as the danger and responds to with an anxiety-signal is that the super-ego
should be angry with it or punish it or cease to love it. The final transformation which the fear of the super-ego undergoes is, it
seems to me, the fear of death (or fear for life) which is a fear of the super-ego projected on to the powers of destiny.

At one time I attached some importance to the view that what found discharge in anxiety was the cathexis which had been
withdrawn in the process of repression. This view seems to me no longer of any interest. The reason for this is that whereas I
formerly believed that anxiety invariably arose automatically through an economic process, my present conception of anxiety as a
signal given by the ego in order to affect the pleasure-unpleasure institution does away with the necessity of considering the
economic factor. Of course there is nothing to be said against the idea that it is precisely the energy that has been liberated by being
withdrawn through repression which is used by the ego to arouse affect; but it is no longer of any importance which portion of the
general energy is employed for this purpose.

This new view of things calls for an examination of another proposition of mine, namely, that the ego is the actual seat of anxiety. I
think this proposition still holds good. There is, as far as can be seen, no reason to assign any manifestation of anxiety to the super-
ego; while the expression anxiety of the id stands in need of correction, though rather as to its form than its substance. Anxiety is an
affective state and as such can, of course, only be felt by the ego. The id cannot have anxiety as the ego can; for it is not an
organization and cannot make a judgment about a situation bf danger. On the other hand it very often happens that processes take
place or begin to take place in the id which cause the ego to produce anxiety. Indeed, it is probable that the earliest repressions as
well as most of the later ones are motivated by an ego anxiety of this sort in regard to processes in the id. Here again one may rightly
distinguish between the case in which something occurs in the id which activates a danger-situation for the ego and induces the
latter to give the anxiety signal for inhibition to take place, and the case in which a situation analogous to the trauma of birth is
established in the id and an automatic reaction of anxiety ensues. The two cases may be brought closer together if it is pointed out
that the second case applies to the earliest and original danger-situation, while the first case applies to any one of the later
determinants of anxiety that have been derived from it; or, with regard to psychological disorders, that the second case is operative
in the aetiology of the actual neuroses, while the first remains typical for that of the psychoneuroses.

We see, then, that it is not so much a question of taking back our earlier findings as of bringing them into line with more recent
discoveries. It is still an undeniable fact that, in sexual abstinence, improper interference with the processes of sexual excitation, or
deflection of the latter from its psychological modification, anxiety arises directly out of libido; in other words, that the ego is
reduced to a state of helplessness in the face of an excessive tension due to need, as it was in the situation of birth, and that anxiety
is then produced. Here once more, though the matter is of little importance, it is very possible that what finds discharge in anxiety is
precisely the surplus of unutilized libido. As we know, a psychoneurosis is especially liable to develop on the basis of an actual
neurosis. This looks as though the ego were attempting to save itself from anxiety, which it has learned to keep in suspension for a
while, and to bind it by the formation of symptoms. Analysis of the traumatic war-neuroses— a term which, by the way, covers a
great variety of disorders—would probably have shown that a number of them possess the characteristics of actual neuroses.

In describing the evolution of the various danger-situations from their prototype, the act of birth, I have had no intention of asserting
that every later determinant of anxiety completely invalidates the preceding one. It is true that as the development of the ego goes
on the earlier danger-situations tend to lose their force and to be set aside, so that one might say that each period of the individual's
life has its appropriate determinant of anxiety. Thus the danger of psychological helplessness is appropriate to the period of life when
his ego is immature; the danger of loss of object, to early childhood when he is still dependent on others; the danger of castration, to
the phallic phase; and the fear of his super-ego, to the latency period. Nevertheless, all these danger-situations and determinants of
anxiety can persist side by side and cause the ego to react to them with anxiety at a later period than the appropriate one; or, again,
several of them can come into operation at the same time. It is possible, more over, that there is a close relationship between the
danger-situation that is operative at a given moment and the form taken by the ensuing neurosis.¹

When, in an earlier part of this discussion, we found that the danger of castration was of importance in more than one neurotic
affection, we put ourselves on guard against over-estimating that factor, since it could not be a decisive one for the female sex, and
since women are undoubtedly more subject to neuroses than men. We now see that there is no danger of our regarding castration
anxiety as the sole motive force of the defensive processes which lead to neurosis. I have shown elsewhere how the little girl, in the
course of her development, is led to make a loving object cathexis through her castration complex. It is precisely in women that the
danger-situation of loss of object seems to have remained the most effective. All we need to do is to make a slight modification in
our description of their determinant of anxiety, in the sense that it is no longer a matter of feeling the want of, or actually losing, the
object itself, but of losing the object's love. Since there is no doubt that hysteria has a strong affinity with the nature of women, just
as obsessional neurosis has with that of men, it appears probable that, as a determinant of anxiety, loss of love plays much
¹Since the differentiation of the ego and the id, our interest in the problems of repression cannot fail to have received a fresh impetus. Up till then we had been
content to confine our interest to those aspects of repression which concerned the ego—the keeping away from consciousness and from motility, and the formation
of substitutes (symptoms). With regard to the instinctual impulses themselves, we assumed that they remained unaltered in the unconscious for an indefinite length
of time. But now our interest is turned to the vicissitudes of the repressed, and we begin to suspect that it is not self-evident, perhaps not even the usual thing, that
those impulses should remain unaltered and unalterable in this way. There is no doubt that the original impulses have been inhibited and deflected from their aim
through repression. But has the unconscious portion of them maintained itself and been proof against the influences of life that tend to alter and depreciate them? In
other words, are the old desires, about whose former existence analysis tells us, still there? The answer seems ready to hand and certain. It is that the old, repressed
desires must still be present in the unconscious, since we still find their derivatives, the symptoms, at work. But this answer is not sufficient. It does not enable us to
decide between two possibilities, either that the old desire is now operating only through its derivatives, having transferred the whole of its cathectic energy to them,
or that it is itself still alive too. If its fate has been to exhaust itself in cathecting its derivatives, there is yet a third possibility. In the course of the neurosis it may have
become reanimated by regression, anachronistic though it be. These are no idle speculations. There are many things about mental life, both normal and pathological,
which seem to call for questions of this kind. In my paper, "The Passing of the Oedipus-Complex" {Collected Papers, II [1924]), I had occasion to notice the difference
between mere repression and the real removal of an old conative impulse.

the same part in hysteria as the threat of castration does in phobias and fear of the super ego in obsessional neurosis.

                                                                                   CHAPTER IX

What we have now to do is to consider the relationship between the formation of symptoms and the production of anxiety. There
seem to be two very widely held opinions on this subject. One is that anxiety is itself a neurotic symptom. The other is that there is a
much more intimate relation between the two. According to the second opinion, symptoms are only formed in order to avoid
anxiety: they bind the mental energy which would otherwise be discharged as anxiety. Thus anxiety would be the fundamental
phenomenon and main problem of neurosis.

That this latter opinion is at least in part true is shown by some striking examples. If an agoraphobic patient who has been
accompanied into the street is left alone there, he will have an anxiety attack. Or if an obsessional neurotic is prevented from
washing his hands after having touched something, he will become a prey to almost unbearable anxiety. It is plain, then, that the
purpose and the result of having a companion in the street or of washing the hands were to obviate outbreaks of anxiety of this kind.
In this sense, every inhibition which the ego imposes upon itself can be called a symptom.

Since we have traced back the production of anxiety to a situation of danger we should prefer to say that symptoms are created in
order to remove the ego from a situation of danger. If the symptoms are prevented from being formed, the danger does in fact
materialize; that is, a situation analogous to birth is established in which the ego is helpless in the face of a constantly increasing
instinctual demand-—the earliest and original determinant of anxiety. Thus in our view the relation between anxiety and symptom is
less close than was supposed, for we have inserted the factor of the danger-situation between them. We can also add that the
production of anxiety sets symptom-formation going and is, indeed, a necessary pre-requisite of it. For if the ego did not arouse the
pleasure-unpleasure institution by developing anxiety, it would not have the power to arrest the process which is preparing in the id
and which threatens danger. There is in all this an evident inclination to limit to a minimum the amount of anxiety developed and to
employ it only as a signal; for to do more would only be to feel in another place the unpleasure which the instinctual process was
threatening to produce, and that would not be a good result from the standpoint of the pleasure-principle, although it is one that
occurs often enough in the neuroses.
The formation of symptoms, then, does in effect put an end to the danger-situation. It has two aspects: one, hidden from view,
brings about those alterations in the id in virtue of which the ego is removed from danger; the other presents to the world what the
symptom formation has created in place of the instinctual process which has been affected—namely, the substitutive formation.

It would, however, be more correct to ascribe to the defensive process what we have just said about symptom-formation and to use
the latter term as synonymous with substitute-formation. It will then be clear that the defensive process is analogous to the method
adopted by the ego for removing itself from a danger that threatens it from outside, that is, to flight. The defensive process is an
attempt at flight from an instinctual danger. An examination of the weak points in this comparison should prove informative. One
thing that can be said against it is that the loss of an object (or loss of love on the part of the object) and the threat of castration are
just as much dangers coming from without as, say, a ferocious animal would be; they are not instinctual dangers. Nevertheless, the
two cases are not the same. A wolf would probably attack a man irrespective of his be haviour towards it; but the loved person
would not cease to love him, nor would he be threatened with castration if he did not entertain certain feelings and intentions in his
mind. Thus such instinctual impulses are determinants of external dangers and so become dangerous in themselves; and the
individual can proceed against the external dangers by taking measures against the internal ones. In phobias of animals, the danger
seems to be still entirely felt as an external one, just as it has undergone an external displacement in the symptoms. In obsessional
neuroses, the danger is much more internalized. That portion of anxiety in regard to the super-ego which constitutes social anxiety
represents an internal substitute for an external danger, while the other portion—moral anxiety—is already completely endo-
psychic.

Another objection is that in taking flight from an impending external danger all that the subject does is to increase the distance
between himself and what is threatening him. He does not prepare to defend himself against it or attempt to alter anything about it,
as would be the case if he attacked the wolf with a stick or shot at it with a gun. Now the defensive process seems to do something
more than would correspond to an attempt at flight. It joins issue with the threatening instinctual process and somehow suppresses
it or deflects it from its aims and thus renders it innocuous. This objection seems unimpeachable and must be given due weight. I
think it is probable that there are some defensive processes which can truly be likened to an attempt at flight, while in others the ego
takes a much more active line of self-protection and initiates vigorous counter-measures. But perhaps the whole analogy between
defence and flight is invalidated by the fact that both the ego and the instinct in the id are parts of the same organization, not
separate entities like the wolf and the child, so that any kind of behaviour on the part of the ego will result in an alteration in the
instinctual process as well.

This study of the determinants of anxiety has, as it were, shown the defensive behaviour of the ego in a rational light. Each situation
of danger corresponds to a particular period of life or developmental phase of the mental apparatus and appears to be justifiable for
it. In early infancy the individual is really not fitted to master psychologically the large quantities of excitation that impinge upon him,
whether from without or from within. Again, at a certain period of life his most important interest really is that the people he is
dependent on should not withdraw their loving care of him. Later on in his boyhood, when he feels that his father is a powerful rival
in regard to his mother and becomes aware of his own aggressive inclinations towards him and of his sexual intentions towards his
mother, he really is justified in being afraid of his father; and his fear of being punished by him can find expression through
phylogenetic reinforcement in the fear of being castrated. Finally, as he enters into social relationships, it really is necessary for him
to be afraid of his super-ego, his conscience; for the absence of that factor would give rise for him to severe conflicts, dangers, and so
on.

But this last point raises a new problem. Instead of the affect of anxiety, let us take, for a moment, another affect, say that of pain. It
seems quite normal that at four years of age a girl should weep painfully if her doll is broken; or at six, if her schoolmistress reproves
her; or at sixteen, if she is slighted by her young man; or at twenty-five, if a child of her own dies. Each of these determinants of pain
has its own time and each passes away when that time is over. Only the final and definitive determinants remain throughout life. We
should think it rather unusual if this same girl, after she had grown to be a wife and mother, were to cry over some worthless trinket
that had been damaged. Yet that is how the neurotic behaves. Although all the institutions for mastering stimuli have long ago been
developed within wide limits in his mental apparatus, and although he is sufficiently grown-up to gratify most of his needs for himself
and has long ago learnt that castration is no longer practiced as a punishment, he nevertheless behaves as though the old danger-
situations still existed, and retains all the earlier determinants of anxiety.

Why this should be so requires a rather long answer. First of all, let us see what the facts are. In a great number of cases the old
determinants of anxiety do really lapse, after having produced neurotic reactions. The phobias of infants, which consist in being
afraid of being alone or in the dark or among strangers— phobias which can almost be called normal— usually pass off later on; the
child "grows out of them," as we say about many other disturbances of childhood. Animal phobias, which are of such frequent
occurrence, undergo the same fate, and many conversion-hysterias of early years find no continuation in later life. Ceremonial
actions appear extremely often in the latency period but only a very small pro portion of them develop later into a full obsessional
neurosis. In general, so far as we can tell from our observations of town children belonging to the white races and living according to
fairly high cultural standards, the neuroses of childhood are in the nature of regular episodes in a child's development, although too
little attention is still being paid to them. Signs of childhood neuroses can be detected in all adult neurotics without exception; but by
no means all children who show those signs become neurotic in later life. It must be, therefore, that certain determinants of anxiety
are relinquished and certain danger-situations lose their significance as the individual becomes more mature. Moreover, some of
these danger-situations manage to survive into later times by modifying their determinants of anxiety so as to bring them up to date.
Thus, for instance, a man may retain his fear of castration in the guise of a syphilidophobia, after he has got to know that it is no
longer customary to castrate people for indulging their sexual lusts, but that, on the other hand, severe diseases may overtake
anyone who thus gives way to his instincts. Furthermore, some determinants of anxiety, such as fear of the super-ego, are destined
not to disappear at all but to accompany the in dividual throughout his life. In that case the neurotic will differ from the normal
person in that his reactions to the dangers in question will be unduly strong. Finally, being grown-up affords no absolute protection
against a return of the original traumatic anxiety-situation. Each individual has in all probability a limit beyond which his mental
apparatus fails in its function of mastering the quantities of excitation which require to be disposed of.

These minor rectifications cannot in any way alter the main fact that a great many people remain infantile in their behaviour in
regard to danger and do not overcome age-old determinants of anxiety. To deny this would be to deny the existence of neurosis, for
it is precisely such people whom we call neurotics. But how is this possible? Why are not all neuroses episodes in the development of
the individual which come to a close when the next phase is reached? Whence comes the element of persistence in these reactions
to danger? Why does the affect of anxiety alone seem to enjoy the advantage over all other affects of evoking reactions which are
distinguished from the rest in being abnormal and which, through their inexpediency, run counter to the movement of life? In other
words, we have once more unexpectedly come upon the riddle which has so often confronted us: whence does neurosis come—
what is its ultimate, its own peculiar meaning? After whole decades of psycho-analytic work, we are as much in the dark about this
problem as ever.



54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 719b-c

But since the ego's work of sublimation results in a defusion of the instincts and a liberation of the aggressive instincts in the super-
ego, its struggle against the libido exposes it to the danger of maltreatment and death. In suffering under the attacks of the super-
ego or perhaps even succumbing to them, the ego is meeting with a fate like that of the protozoa which are destroyed by the
products of disintegration that they themselves have created. From the economic point of view, the morality that functions in the
super-ego seems to be a similar product of disintegration.

Amongthe subordinate relationships in which the ego stands, that to the super-ego is perhaps the most interesting.

The ego is the true abode of anxiety. Threatened by dangers from three directions, it develops the flight-reflex by withdrawing its
own cathexis from the menacing perception or from the equally dreaded process in the id, and discharging it as anxiety. This
primitive reaction is later replaced by the introduction of protective cathexes (the mechanism of the phobias). What it is that the ego
fears either from an external or from a libidinal danger cannot be specified; we know that it is in the nature of an overthrow or of
extinction, but it is not determined by analysis. The ego is simply obeying the warning of the pleasure-principle. On the other hand,
we can tell what lies hidden behind the ego's dread of the super-ego, its fear of conscience. The higher being which later became the
ego-ideal once threatened the ego with castration, and this dread of castration is probably the kernel round which the subsequent
fear of conscience has gathered; it is this dread that persists as the fear of conscience.

The high-sounding phrase, "Every fear is ultimately the fear of death," has hardly any meaning; at any rate, it cannot be justified. It
seems to me, on the contrary, perfectly correct to distinguish the fear of death from dread of an external object (objective anxiety)
and from neurotic libidinal anxiety. It presents a difficult problem to psycho-analysis, for death is an abstract concept with a negative
content for which no unconscious correlative can be found. It would seem that the mechanism of the fear of death can only be that
the ego relinquishes its narcissistic libidinal cathexis in a very large measure, that is, that it gives up itself, just as it gives up some
external object in other cases in which it feels anxiety. I believe that the fear of death concerns an interplay between the ego and the
super-ego.
54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 720a

These considerations enable us to conceive of the fear of death, like the fear of conscience, as a development of the fear of
castration. The great significance which the sense of guilt has in the neuroses makes it conceivable that ordinary neurotic anxiety is
reinforced in severe cases by a development of anxiety between the ego and the super-ego (fear of castration, of conscience, of
death).



54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 721a

                                          Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety
                                                               CHAPTER I

In describing pathological phenomena, we are enabled by the ordinary usages of speech to distinguish symptoms from inhibitions,
without, however, attaching much importance to the distinction. Indeed, we might hardly think it worthwhile to differentiate more
exactly between the two, were it not for the fact that we meet with illnesses in which we observe the presence of inhibitions but not
of symptoms and are curious to know the reason for this.

The two concepts are not upon the same plane. Inhibition has a special relation to function. It does not necessarily have a
pathological implication. One can quite well call a normal restriction of a function an inhibition of it. A symptom, on the other hand,
actually denotes the presence of some pathological process. Thus, an inhibition (among other things) may be a symptom. In ordinary
speech, we should use the word inhibition when there is a simple lowering of function, and symptom when a function has
undergone some unusual change or when a new phenomenon has arisen out of it. Very often it seems to be quite an arbitrary
matter whether we emphasize the positive side of a pathological process and call its consequences a symptom, or its negative side
and call them an inhibition. But all this is really of little interest; and the problem as we have stated it does not carry us very far.

Since the concept of inhibition is so intimately associated with that of function, we may perhaps proceed to examine the various
functions of the ego with a view to discovering what forms any disturbance of those functions will assume in each of the different
neurotic affections. Let us pick out for a comparative study of this kind the sexual function and those of eating, of locomotion, and of
occupational work.



54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 721c

That there is a relationship between inhibition and anxiety is pretty evident. Many inhibitions obviously represent a relinquishment
of a function whose exercise would produce anxiety. Many women are openly afraid of the sexual function. We class this anxiety
under hysteria, just as we do the defensive symptom of disgust which, arising originally as a deferred reaction to the experiencing of
a passive sexual act, appears later whenever the idea of such an act is presented. Furthermore, many obsessional acts turn out to be
measures of precaution and security against sexual experiences and are thus of a phobic character.

This is not very illuminating. We can only note that disturbances of the sexual function are brought about by a great variety of
means, (i) The libido may simply be turned away (this seems most readily to produce what we regard as an inhibition pure and
simple); (2) the function may be less well carried out; (3) it may be hampered by having conditions attached to it, or modified by
being diverted to other aims; (4) it may be prevented by measures of security; (5) if it cannot be prevented from starting, it may be
immediately interrupted by the appearance of anxiety; and (6), if it is nevertheless carried out, there may be a subsequent reaction
of protest against it and an attempt to undo what has been done.



54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 723c

We are very apt to think of the ego as power less against the id; but, when it is opposed to an instinctual process, it has only to give a
signal of unpleasure in order to attain its: object with the aid of that almost omnipotent institution, the pleasure-principle. To take
this situation by itself for a moment, we can illustrate it by an example from another field. Let us imagine a country in which a certain
small faction objects to a proposed measure the passage of which would have the support of the masses. This minority obtains
command of the press and by its help manipulates the supreme arbiter, public opinion, and so succeeds in preventing the measure
from being passed.
But this explanation opens up fresh problems. Whence does the energy come which is employed for giving the signal of unpleasure?
Here we may be assisted by the idea that a defence against an unwelcome internal process will be modelled upon the defence
adopted against an external stimulus, that the ego wards off internal and external dangers alike along identical lines. In the case of
external danger, the organism has recourse to attempts at flight. The first thing it does is to withdraw cathexis from the perception of
the dangerous object; later on it discovers that it is a better plan to perform muscular movements of such a sort as will render
perception of the dangerous object impossible, even in the absence of any refusal to perceive it—that it is a better plan, that is, to
remove itself from the sphere of danger. Repression is an equivalent of this attempt at flight. The ego withdraws its (preconscious)
cathexis from the psychical representative of the impulse that is to be repressed and uses that cathexis for the purpose of re leasing
unpleasure (anxiety). The problem of how anxiety arises in connection with repression may be no simple one; but we may
legitimately maintain the opinion that the ego is the actual seat of anxiety and give up our earlier view that the cathectic energy of a
re pressed impulse is automatically turned into anxiety. If I expressed myself in the latter sense on former occasions, I was giving a
phenomenological description and not a meta-psychological explanation of what was occurring.



54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 724a-727c

As I have shown elsewhere, most of the repressions with which we have to deal in our therapeutic work are cases of after-expulsion.
They presuppose the operation of earlier, primal repressions which exert an attraction on the more recent situation. Far too little is
known as yet about the background and preliminary stages of repression. There is a danger of over-estimating the part played in
repression by the super-ego. We cannot at present say, for instance, whether it is the emergence of the super-ego which provides
the line of demarcation between primal repression and after-expulsion. At any rate, the earliest out breaks of anxiety, which are of a
very intense kind, occur before the super-ego has become differentiated. It is highly probable that the precipitating causes of primal
repression are quantitative factors such as an excessive degree of excitation and the breaking through of the protective barrier
against stimuli.

This mention of the protective barrier sounds a note which recalls to us the fact that repressions occur in two different situations,
namely, when an undesirable instinctual impulse is aroused by some external perception, and when it arises internally without any
such provocation. We shall return to this difference presently. But the protective barrier only exists in regard to external stimuli, not
in regard to internal instinctual demands.

So long as we direct our attention to the ego's attempt at flight, we shall get no nearer to the subject of symptom-formation. A
symptom arises from an instinctual impulse which has been prejudicially affected by repression. If the ego, by making use of the
signal of unpleasure, attains its object of completely suppressing the instinctual impulse, we learn nothing of how this has happened.
We can only find out about it from those cases in which repression has to a greater or less extent failed. In this event the position,
generally speaking, is that the instinctual impulse has found a substitute in spite of repression, but a substitute which is very much
reduced, displaced, and inhibited, and which is no longer recognizable as a gratification. And when the impulse is carried out, there is
no sensation of pleasure; its carrying out has, instead, the quality of a compulsion.

In thus degrading a gratificatory process to a symptom, repression displays its power in a further respect. The substitutive process is
prevented, if possible, from finding discharge through motility; and even if this cannot be done the process is forced to expend itself
in making alterations in the subject's own body and is not permitted to impinge upon the outer world. It may not be transformed
into action. For, as we know, in repression the ego is operating under the influence of external reality and therefore it debars the
substitutive process from having any effect upon that reality.

Just as the ego controls the path to action in regard to the outer world, so it controls access to consciousness. In repression it displays
its power in both directions, acting, in the one manner, upon the instinctual impulse itself and, in the other, upon the psychical
representative of that impulse. At this point it is relevant to ask how I can reconcile this acknowledgment of the might of the ego
with the description of its position which I gave in The Ego and the Id. In that book I drew a picture of its dependence upon the id
and upon the super-ego which revealed how powerless and apprehensive it was in regard to both and with what an effort it
maintained its superiority over them. This view has been widely echoed in psycho-analytic literature. A great deal of stress has been
laid on the weakness of the ego in relation to the id and of our rational elements in the face of the demonic forces within us; and
there is a strong tendency to make what I have said into a foundation-stone of a psycho-analytic Weltanschauung. Yet surely the
psycho-analyst, with his knowledge of the way in which repression works, should, of all people, be restrained from adopting such
extreme and one-sided views.
I must confess that I am not at all partial to the fabrication of Weltanschauungen. Such activities may be left to philosophers, who
avowedly find it impossible to make their journey through life without a Baedeker of that kind to tell them all about everything. Let
us humbly accept the contempt with which they look down on us from the vantage-ground of their superior needs. But since we too
cannot forego our narcissistic pride, we will draw com fort from the reflection that such "Guides to Life" soon grow out of date, and
that it is precisely short-sighted, narrow, and finicky work like ours which obliges them to appear in new editions, and that even the
most up-to-date of them are nothing but attempts to find a substitute for the ancient, useful, and all embracing catechism. We know
well enough how little light science has so far been able to throw on the problems that surround us. But however much ado the
philosophers may make, they cannot alter the situation. Only patient, persevering research, in which everything is subordinated to
the one requirement of certainty, can gradually bring about a change. The benighted traveller may sing aloud in the dark to deny his
own fears; but, for all that, he will not see an inch further beyond his nose.

                                                              CHAPTER III

To return to this problem about the ego. The apparent contradiction is due to our having taken abstractions too rigidly and attended
exclusively now to the one side and now to the other of what is in reality a complicated state of affairs. We were justified, I think, in
dividing the ego from the id, for there were certain considerations which necessitated that step. On the other hand, the ego is
identical with the id, and is merely a specially differentiated part of it. If we regard this part by itself, in contradistinction to the
whole, or if a real split has occurred between the two, the weakness of the ego becomes apparent. But if the ego remains bound up
with the id and indistinguishable from it, then it displays its power. The same is true of the relation between the ego and the super-
ego. In many situations, the two are merged; and as a rule we can only distinguish one from the other when there is a tension or
conflict between them. In repression, the decisive fact is that the ego is an organization and the id is not. The ego is, indeed, the
organized portion of the id. We should be quite wrong in picturing the ego and the id as two opposing camps and in thinking that,
when the ego tries to suppress a part of the id by means of repression, the remainder of the id comes to the rescue of the
endangered part and measures its strength with the ego. This may often be what happens, but it is not the primary situation in
repression. As a rule, the instinctual impulse which is to be repressed remains isolated. Al though the act of repression demonstrates
the strength of the ego, in one particular it reveals the ego's powerlessness and reveals, too, how impervious to influence are the
separate instinctual impulses of the id. For the mental process, which has been turned into a symptom owing to repression,
maintains its existence outside the organization of the ego and independently of it. Indeed, it is not the process alone but all its
derivatives which enjoy, as it were, the privilege of extra-territoriality; and whenever they come into associative contact with a part
of the ego-organization, it is not at all certain that they will not draw that part over to themselves and thus enlarge themselves at the
expense of the ego. Long ago I compared a symptom to a foreign body which was keeping up a constant succession of stimuli and
reactions in the tissue in which it was imbedded. It does sometimes happen that the defensive struggle against an unwelcome
instinctual impulse is brought to an end with the formation of a symptom. As far as can be seen, this is most often possible in
hysterical conversions. But usually the outcome is different. The initial act of repression is followed by tedious and often interminable
manoeuvres in which the struggle against the instinctual impulse is prolonged into a struggle against the symptom.

In this secondary defensive struggle, the ego faces two ways. The one line of behaviour it adopts springs from the fact that its very
nature obliges it to make what must be regarded as an attempt at restoration or reconciliation. The ego is an organization. It is based
upon the maintenance of free intercourse and of the possibility of reciprocal influence between all its parts. Its de-sexualized energy
still shows traces of its origin in its tendency to bind together and unify, and this necessity to synthetize grows stronger in proportion
as the strength of the ego increases. It is therefore only natural that the ego should try to prevent symptoms from remaining isolated
and foreign by using every possible method to bind them to itself in one way or another, and to incorporate them in its organization
by means of those bonds. As we know, a tendency of this kind is already operative in the very act of forming a symptom. A classical
instance of this are those hysterical symptoms which have been shown to be a compromise between the need for gratification and
the need for punishment. Such symptoms participate in the ego from the very beginning, since they fulfil a requirement of the super-
ego, while, on the other hand, they represent positions occupied by the repressed and points at which an irruption has been made
by it into the ego-organization. They are a kind of frontier-position with a mixed cathexis. (Whether all primary hysterical symptoms
are constructed on these lines would be worth enquiring into very carefully.) The ego now proceeds to behave as though it
recognized that the symptom had come to stay and that the only thing to do was to accept the situation in good part and draw as
much advantage from it as possible. It makes an adaptation to the symptom—to this piece of the internal world which is alien to it—
just as it normally does to the objective, external world. It can always find plenty of opportunities for doing so. The presence of a
symptom may entail a certain impairment of the capacities of the individual, and this can be exploited to appease some demand on
the part of the super-ego or to refuse some requirement coming from the external world. In this way, the symptom gradually grows
to be the representative of important interests; it is found to be useful for the maintenance of the self and becomes more and more
closely merged with the ego and more and more indispensable to it. It is only very rarely that the physical process of healing round a
foreign body follows such a course as this. There is a danger, too, of exaggerating the importance of a secondary adaptation of this
kind to a symptom, and of saying that the ego has created the symptom merely in order to enjoy its advantages. It would be equally
true to say that a man who had lost his leg in the war had got it shot away so that he might thenceforward live on his pension
without having to work any more.

In obsessional neurosis and paranoia, the forms which the symptoms assume become very valuable to the ego because they obtain
for it, not certain advantages, but a narcissistic gratification which it would otherwise forgo. The symptoms which the obsessional
neurotic constructs flatter his self-esteem by making him feel that he is better than others because he is specially cleanly or specially
conscientious. The delusional constructions of the paranoiac offer to his acute perceptive and imaginative powers a field of activity
which he could not easily find elsewhere.

All of this results in what is known as the epinosic gain of a neurosis. This epinosic gain comes to the assistance of the ego in its
endeavour to incorporate the symptom and in creases the fixation of the latter. When the analyst tries to help the ego in its struggle
against the symptom, he finds that these reconciliatory bonds between ego and symptom operate on the side of the resistances and
that they are not easy to loosen.

The two lines of behaviour which the ego adopts towards the symptom are in fact directly opposed to each other. For the other line
is less friendly in character, since it continues in the direction of repression. Nevertheless the ego, it appears, cannot be accused of
inconsistency. Being of a peaceable disposition it would like to incorporate the symptom in its framework. It is from the symptom
itself that the trouble comes. For the symptom, being the true substitute and derivative of the repressed impulse, carries on the role
of the latter; it continually renews its demands for gratification and thus obliges the ego in its turn to give the signal of unpleasure
and put itself in a posture of defence.

The secondary defensive struggle against the symptom is many-sided. It is fought out on many fields and makes use of a multitude of
means. We shall not be able to say much about it until we have made an enquiry into individual cases of symptom-formation. In
doing this we shall have an opportunity of going into the problem of anxiety—a problem which has long been looming in the
background. The wisest plan will be, I think, to start from the symptoms produced by the hysterical neuroses; for we are not as yet in
a position to consider the conditions in which the symptoms of obsessional neurosis, paranoia, and other neuroses are formed.

                                                                              CHAPTER IV

Let us take as our first example an infantile hysterical phobia of animals. We will select the case of Little Hans,¹ whose phobia of
horses was undoubtedly typical in all its main features. The first thing that is apparent is that in a concrete case of neurotic illness the
state of affairs is much more complex than one would suppose so long as one was dealing with abstractions. It takes some time to
orientate oneself and to decide which the repressed impulse is, what substitutive symptom it has found and where the motive for
repression lies.

Little Hans refused to go out into the street because he was afraid of horses. This is the raw material of the case. Which part of it
constitutes the symptoms? Is it his having the fear? Is it his choice of an object for his fear? Is it his giving up his freedom of
movement? Or is it several of these combined? What is the gratification which he renounces? And why does he have to renounce it?

At a first glance one is tempted to reply that the case is not so very obscure. Little Hans's unaccountable fear of horses is the
symptom, and his inability to go out into the streets is an inhibition, a restriction which his ego has imposed on itself so as not to
arouse the anxiety-symptom. The second point is clearly correct; and in the discussion which follows I shall not concern myself any
further with this inhibition. As regards what was presumably the symptom, a superficial acquaintance with the case does not even
disclose its true formulation. For further investigation shows that what he was suffering from was not a vague fear of horses but a
quite definite apprehension that a horse was going to bite him. This idea, indeed, was endeavouring to withdraw from conscious
ness and get itself replaced by an undefined phobia in which only the anxiety and its object still appeared. Was it perhaps this idea
which was the nucleus of his symptom?

We shall not make any headway until we have reviewed the little boy's psychological situation as a whole as it came to light in the
course of analytic treatment. He was at that time in the Oedipus position, with its attendant feelings of jealousy and hostility towards
his father whom nevertheless—except in so far as his mother was the cause of estrangement—he dearly loved. Here, then, we have
a conflict due to ambivalence: a firmly rooted love and a no less well-grounded hatred directed against
¹Freud, "Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy" (1909), Collected Papers, in.

one and the same person. Little Hans's phobia must be an attempt to solve this conflict. Conflicts of this kind due to ambivalence are
very frequent and they can have another typical outcome, in which one of the two conflicting feelings (usually that of affection)
becomes enormously enhanced and the other vanishes. Only the exaggerated degree and compulsive character of the feeling that
remains betray the fact that it is not the sole one in existence but is continually on the alert to keep the opposite feeling under
suppression, and enables us to postulate the operation of a process which we call repression by means of reaction formation (in the
ego). Cases like Little Hans's show no traces of a reaction-formation of this kind. There are clearly different ways of egress from a
conflict of ambivalence.

Meanwhile we have been able to establish another point with certainty. The instinctual impulse which underwent repression in Little
Hans was a hostile one against his father. Proof of this was obtained in his analysis while the idea of the biting horse was being
followed up. Hans had seen a horse fall down and he had also seen a playmate, with whom he was playing at horses, fall down and
hurt himself. Analysis justified the inference that he had a conative impulse that his father should fall down and hurt himself as his
playmate and the horse had done. Moreover, his attitude towards someone's departure on a certain occasion makes it probable that
his wish that his father should be out of the way found a less hesitating expression. But a wish of this sort is tantamount to an
intention of putting the father out of the way oneself—is tantamount, that is, to the murderous impulse which is one component of
the Oedipus complex.



54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 729a-b

Further research into the case-history of the Wolf Man leaves no doubt of the correctness of this explanation. The genital impulse, it
is true, betrays no sign of its tender inclination when it is expressed in the language belonging to that transition phase between the
oral and sadistic organization of the libido which has been left behind. Besides, is it merely a question of the replacement of a
particular psychical representative by a regressive form of expression, or is it a question of the genuine regressive degradation of a
genitally orientated impulse in the id? It is not at all easy to make certain. The case-history of the Wolf Man gives very definite
support to the second, more serious, view, for, from the time of the decisive dream onward, the boy became naughty, tormenting,
and sadistic, and soon after developed a regular obsessional neurosis. At any rate we can see that repression is not the only means
which the ego can employ for the purpose of defence against an unwelcome instinctual impulse. If it succeeds in making an instinct
regress, it will actually have done it much more injury than it could have by repressing it. Sometimes, indeed, after forcing an instinct
to regress in this way,-it goes on to repress it.

The case of the Wolf Man and the somewhat less complicated one of Little Hans raise a number of further considerations. But we
already learn two unexpected facts. There can be no doubt that the instinctual impulse which was repressed in both phobias was a
hostile one against the father. One might say that that impulse had been repressed by being reversed. Instead of aggressiveness
towards the father there appeared aggressiveness from the father in the shape of revenge. Since this aggressive ness is in any case
rooted in the sadistic phase of the libido, a certain degree of degradation of it is all that is needed to reduce it to the oral stage. This
stage, while only adumbrated in Little Hans's fear of being bitten, was blatantly exhibited in the Wolf Man's terror of being devoured.
But, besides this, the analysis has demonstrated, beyond a shadow of a doubt, the presence of another instinctual impulse of an
opposite nature which had succumbed to repression. This was a loving, passive impulse directed towards the father, which had
already attained the genital (phallic) level of libidinal organization. As regards the final outcome of the process of repression, this
impulse seems, indeed, to have been the more important of the two; it underwent a more far-reaching regression and had a decisive
influence upon the content of the phobia. In following up a single current of instinctual repression, we have thus come upon a
confluence of two. The two instinctual impulses that have been overtaken by repression—sadistic aggressiveness towards the father
and passive affection for him—form a pair of opposites. Furthermore, a full comprehension of Little Hans's case shows that the
formation of his phobia had had the effect of abolishing his affectionate object-cathexis of his mother as well, though the actual
content of his phobia betrayed no sign of it. The process of repression had attacked almost all the components of his Oedipus
complex—both his hostile and his tender impulses towards his father and his tender impulses towards his mother. In my Russian
patient, this state of affairs was much less patent.



54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 731d-732d

Let us turn to the obsessional neuroses in the hope of learning more about the formation of symptoms. The symptoms belonging to
this neurosis fall, in general, into two groups, each having an opposite bias. They are either prohibitions, precautions and
expiations—that is, negative in character—or they are substitutive gratifications often appearing in symbolic disguise. The negative,
defensive group of symptoms is the more primary of the two; but as the illness is prolonged the gratificatory group, overriding all
defensive measures, gains the upper hand. The symptom-formation scores a triumph if it succeeds in combining the two by joining to
what was originally a defensive command or prohibition the significance of a gratification; and in order to achieve this end it will
often make use of the most ingenious associative paths. Such an achievement demonstrates the tendency of the ego to
synthetization which it has already been seen to possess. In extreme cases the patient manages to make most of his symptoms have,
in addition to their original meaning, a directly contrary one. This is a tribute to the power of ambivalence, which, no one knows why,
plays such a large part in obsessional neuroses. In the crudest instance the symptom has two phases: an action which carries out a
certain injunction is immediately succeeded by another action which stops or undoes the first one, even if it does not go quite so far
as to carry out its opposite.

Two impressions at once emerge from this brief survey of obsessional symptoms. The first is that a ceaseless struggle is being waged
against the repressed, in which the repressing forces steadily lose ground; the second is that the ego and the super-ego have a
specially large share in the formation of the symptoms.

Obsessional neurosis is unquestionably the most interesting and repaying subject of analytic research. But as a problem it has not yet
been mastered. It must be confessed that, if we endeavour to penetrate more deeply into its nature, we still have to rely upon
doubtful assumptions and unconfirmed suppositions. Obsessional neurosis originates, no doubt, in the same situation as hysteria,
namely, the necessity of warding off the libidinal demands of the Oedipus complex. Indeed, every obsessional neurosis seems to
have a substratum of hysterical symptoms that have been formed at a very early stage. But it is subsequently shaped along quite
different lines owing to a constitutional factor. The genital organization of the libido turns out to be weak and insufficiently resistant,
so that when the ego begins its defensive actions the first thing it succeeds in doing is to throw back, in part or altogether, the genital
organization (of the phallic phase) on to the earlier sadistic-anal level. This phenomenon of regression is decisive for all that follows.

Another possibility has to be considered. Perhaps regression is the result not of a constitutional factor but of a time-factor. It may be
that regression is rendered possible not because the genital organization of the libido is too weak, but because the opposition of the
ego begins too early, while the sadistic phase is at its height. I am not prepared to express an absolute opinion on this point, but I
may say that analytic observation does not speak in favour of such an assumption. It rather tends to show that by the time an
obsessional neurosis begins to show itself the phallic stage has already been attained. Moreover, the onset of this neurosis belongs
to a later time of life than that of hysteria. It sets in in the second period of childhood, with the latency period. In a patient whose
case I was able to study and who was overtaken by this disorder at a very late date, it became clear that the determining cause of his
regression and of the emergence of his obsessional neurosis was a real occurrence that impaired a genital life which had up till then
been intact.

As regards a meta-psychological explanation of regression I am inclined to find it in a defusion of instinct, in a detachment of the
erotic components which, at the beginning of the genital stage, had become joined to the destructive cathexes belonging to the
sadistic phase.

In bringing regression about, the ego scores the first point in its defensive struggle against the demands of the libido. In this
connection we shall find it advantageous to distinguish the more general notion of defence from repression. Repression is only one
of the mechanisms which defence makes use of. It is perhaps in obsessional cases more than in normal or hysterical ones that we can
most clearly recognize that the motive force of defence is the castration com plex and that what is being warded off are the trends of
the Oedipus complex. We are at present dealing with the beginning of the latency period, a period which is characterized by the
passing away of the Oedipus complex, the creation or consolidation of the super-ego and the erection of ethical and aesthetic
barriers in the ego. In obsessional neuroses, these processes are carried further than is normal. In order to effect the destruction of
the Oedipus complex, a regressive degradation of the libido takes place as well, the super-ego becomes exceptionally severe and
unkind, and the ego, in obedience to the super-ego, produces strong reaction-formations in the shape of conscientious ness, pity,
and cleanliness. Implacable, though not therefore always successful, severity is shown in putting down the temptation to continue
early infantile masturbation which is now attached to regressive (sadistic-anal) ideational images but which still represents the unsub
jugated part of the phallic organization. There is an inherent contradiction about this state of affairs, in which, precisely in the
interests of masculinity (castration anxiety), every activity belonging to masculinity is stopped. But here, too, obsessional neurosis is
only overdoing the normal method of abolishing the Oedipus complex. We once more find an illustration of the truth that every
exaggeration contains the seed of its own destruction. For, under the guise of obsessional acts, the masturbation that has been
suppressed approaches ever more closely to gratification.
54 FREUD: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety, esp 742a-c

Only a few of the manifestations of anxiety in children are comprehensible to us, and we must confine our attention to them. They
occur, for instance, when a child is alone or in the dark, or when it finds itself with an unknown person instead of one to whom it is
used—such as its mother. These three instances can be reduced to a single condition, namely, that of missing someone who is loved
and longed-for.

Here is the key, I think, to an understanding of anxiety and to a reconciliation of the contradictions that seem to beset it. The child's
memory picture of the person longed-for is no doubt intensively cathected, probably in a hallucinatory way at first. But this has no
effect; and now it seems as though the longing turns into anxiety. This anxiety has all the appearance of being an expression of the
child's feeling of not knowing what to do, as though in its still undeveloped state it did not know how to cope with its cathexis of
longing. Here anxiety seems to be a reaction to the felt loss of the object; and one is at once reminded of the fact that castration
anxiety, too, is a fear of being separated from a highly valued object, and that the earliest anxiety of all— the primal anxiety of
birth—is brought about on the occasion of a separation from the mother.

But our next reflection takes us a step beyond this question of loss of object. The reason why the infant in arms wants to perceive the
presence of its mother is only because it already knows by experience that she gratifies all its needs without delay. The situation,
then, that it regards as a danger and against which it wants to be safe-guarded is one of non-gratification, of a growing tension due to
need, against which it is helpless. I think that if we adopt this view all the facts fall into place. The situation of non-gratification in
which the amounts of stimulation rise to an unpleasurable height without the infant being able to master them by utilizing and
discharging them psychologically must be analogous for it to the experience of being born—must be a repetition of that situation of
danger. What both situations have in common is an economic disturbance caused by an accumulation of amounts of stimulation
which require to be disposed of. It is this element which is the real essence of the danger. In both cases the same reaction of anxiety
sets in.

(This anxiety reaction is still an expedient one in the child at the sucking stage, for, just as it activated the lungs of the new-born baby
to get rid of the internal stimuli, so now, in being discharged into the respiratory and vocal muscular apparatus, it calls the mother to
the child's side.) It is unnecessary to suppose that the child carries with it from the time of its birth anything more than this way of
indicating the presence of danger.

When the child has found out by experience that an external, perceptible object can put an end to the dangerous situation which is
reminiscent of birth, the nature of the danger it fears is displaced from the economic situation on to the condition which determined
that situation, viz., the loss of object. It is the absence of the mother that is now the danger; and as soon as that danger arises the
small child gives the signal of anxiety, before the dreaded economic situation has set in. This change constitutes a first important step
forward in the provision made by the child for its self-preservation, and at the same time rep resents a transition from the automatic
and involuntary new-creation of anxiety to the intentional reproduction of anxiety as a signal of danger.



54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 841a-843c

                                                               LECTURE 32

                                                       Anxiety and Instinctual Life

Ladies and Gentlemen : You will not be surprised to hear that I have a great deal of new information to give you about our
hypotheses on the subject of anxiety and the fundamental instincts of the mind, and also that none of this information claims to
provide a final solution of these doubtful problems. I speak purposely of hypotheses. This is the most difficult task that has been set
us, but the difficulty does not lie in the incompleteness of our observations, for it is actually the commonest and most familiar
phenomena that present us with such riddles; nor does it lie in the remoteness of the speculations to which these phenomena give
rise, for speculation hardly comes into the picture in this connection. No, it is genuinely a question of hypotheses; that is to say, of
the introduction of the right abstract ideas, and of their application to the raw material of observation so as to bring order and
lucidity into it.

I devoted one lecture in my former series—the twenty-fifth—to the study of anxiety. I must recapitulate its contents in brief. We said
then that anxiety is an affective condition— that is to say, a combination of certain feelings of the pleasure-pain series with their
corresponding efferent innervations, and a perception of them—but we asserted that anxiety is prob ably also the trace of a certain
important event, taken over by inheritance, and therefore comparable to the ontogenetically acquired hysterical attack. We
suggested that the event which left this affective trace behind it was the process of birth, in which the modifications of the heart's
action and of respiration, which are characteristic of anxiety, served a useful purpose. The first anxiety of all would thus have been a
toxic one. We then started from the distinction between objective anxiety and neurotic anxiety, the former being what seems to us
an intelligible reaction to danger—that is, to anticipated injury from without—and the latter altogether puzzling and, as it were,
purposeless. In our analysis of objective anxiety we explained it as a condition of increased sensory attention and motor tension,
which we called anxiety-preparedness. Out of this the anxiety-reaction arises. The anxiety-reaction may run one of two courses.
Either the anxiety development, the repetition of the old traumatic experience, is restricted to a signal, in which case the rest of the
reaction can adapt itself to the new situation of danger, whether by flight or defence; or the old experience gets the upper hand, and
the whole reaction exhausts itself in anxiety-development, in which case the affective state is paralyzing and un-adapted to the
present situation.

We then turned our attention to neurotic anxiety, and pointed out that it could be observed in three forms. Firstly, we have free
floating, general apprehensiveness, ready to attach itself for the time being to any new possibility that may arise in the form of what
we call expectant dread, as happens, for instance, in the typical anxiety-neurosis. Secondly, we find it firmly attached to certain ideas,
in what are known as phobias, in which we can still recognize a connection with external danger, but cannot help regarding the
anxiety felt towards it as enormously exaggerated. Thirdly and finally, we have anxiety as it occurs in hysteria and in other severe
neuroses; this anxiety either accompanies symptoms or manifests itself independently, whether as an attack or as a condition which
persists for some time, but always without having any visible justification in an external danger. We then asked ourselves two
questions: "What are people afraid of when they have neurotic anxiety?" and: "How can one bring this kind of anxiety into line with
objective anxiety felt towards an external danger?"

Our investigations were by no means unsuccessful, and we succeeded in reaching a few important conclusions. With regard to
anxious expectation, clinical experience has taught us that there is a regular relationship between it and the disposition of the libido
in the sexual life. The most frequent cause of anxiety-neurosis is undischarged excitation. A libidinal excitation is aroused, but is: not
satisfied or used; in the place of this libido which has been diverted from its use, anxiety makes its appearance. I even thought it was
justifiable to say that this unsatisfied libido is directly transformed into anxiety. This view found some support in certain almost
universal phobias of small children. Many of these phobias are altogether enigmatic, but others, such as the fear of being left alone
and the fear of unfamiliar people, can be definitely explained. Being left alone or seeing strange faces stirs up the child's longing for
the familiar presence of its mother; it cannot control this libidinal excitation; it cannot keep it in a state of suspension, but turns it
into anxiety. This anxiety in children, therefore, is not objective anxiety, but must be classed among the neurotic anxieties. Children's
phobias, and the anxious expectation in anxiety-neurosis, serve as two examples of one way in which neurotic anxiety comes about;
i.e., through direct transformation of libido. In a moment we shall learn of a second method, and we shall see that it is not so very
different from the first.

For it is to the process of repression that we attribute the appearance of anxiety in hysteria and other neuroses^ We now believe
that it is possible to give a fuller description Of this process than before, if we separate the history of the idea that has to be
repressed from that of the libido which is attached to it. It is the idea that undergoes repression and may be distorted so as to
become unrecognizable; its associated affect is always turned into anxiety, regardless of its nature^ whether, that is to say, it is
aggression or love. Now it makes no essential difference on what grounds a given quantity of libido has become unusable, whether
on account of the infantile weakness of the ego, as in the case of children's phobias, or on account of somatic processes in sexual life,
as in the case of anxiety neuroses, or on account of repression, as in the case of hysteria. The two mechanisms which give rise to
neurotic anxiety are therefore essentially the same.

While we were engaged in these investigations, we noticed a very important connection between anxiety-development and
symptom formation. It was that the two are interchange able. The agoraphbbiac, for example, begins his illness with an attack of
anxiety in the street. This is repeated every time he walks along the street again. He now develops a symptom—a street phobia—
which can also be described as an inhibition of a functional restriction of the ego, and thus he preserves himself from anxiety attacks.
One can observe the reverse process if one interferes with the formation of symptoms, as is possible, for instance, in the case of
obsessive acts. If one prevents a patient from carrying out his washing ceremonial, he is thrown into an intolerable state of anxiety,
against which his symptom has obviously protected him. And, indeed, it seems as though anxiety-development is the earlier and
symptom-formation the later of the two, as though the symptom were created in order to prevent the outbreak of a state of anxiety.
And it is in keeping with this that the first neuroses of childhood are phobias—conditions, that is to say, in which one sees quite
clearly how what began as anxiety-development is later replaced by symptom-formation: one gets an impression that this
circumstance affords the best starting-point from which to approach an understanding of neurotic anxiety. At the same time, we
succeeded in discovering the answer to the question of what it is that one fears in neurotic anxiety, and thus restoring the
connection between neurotic anxiety and objective anxiety. What one fears is obviously one's own libido. The difference between
this and objective anxiety lies in two points—that the danger is an internal instead of an external one, and that it is not Consciously
recognized.

In the case of phobias one can see clearly how this internal danger is transformed into an external one; how, that is to say, neurotic
anxiety turns into apparent objective anxiety. Let us simplify a state of affairs which is often very complicated, and suppose that the
agoraphobiac is always afraid of his impulses in connection with temptations aroused in him by meeting people in the street. In his
phobia he makes a displacement and is now afraid of an external situation. What he gains thereby is obvious; it is that he feels he can
protect himself better in that way. One can rescue oneself from an external danger by flight, whereas to attempt to fly from an
internal danger is a difficult undertaking.

At the end of my original lecture on anxiety I expressed the opinion that, though these various results of our investigations did not
actually contradict one another, they were nevertheless not entirely consistent. As an affective condition, anxiety is the reproduction
of an old danger-threatening event; anxiety serves the purposes of self-preservation as being a signal of the presence bf a new
danger; it arises from libido that has become unusable for some reason or other, including the process of repression; it is replaced by
symptom formation, and is thus, as it were, psychically bound; in all of this one feels that something is missing which would combine
these fragments into a unity.

Ladies and Gentlemen—The division of the mental personality into a super-ego, ego, and id, which I spoke about in the last lecture,
has forced us to take up a new position with regard to the problem of anxiety. In assuming that the ego is the only seat of anxiety,
and that only the ego can produce and feel anxiety, we have taken up a new and secure position, from which many facts take on a
new aspect. And when you come to think of it, it is difficult to see what sense there could be in speaking of an anxiety of the id, or
how we could ascribe a capacity for feeling anxiety to the super-ego. On the contrary, we have found a satisfactory confirmation of
our theory in the fact that the three main varieties of anxiety—objective anxiety, neurotic anxiety, and moral anxiety— can so easily
be related to the three directions in which the ego is dependent, on the external world, on the id, and on the super-ego. Our new
position, too, has brought to the fore the function of anxiety as a signal indicating the presence of a danger-situation, a function with
which we were already not unfamiliar. The question of the stuff out of which anxiety is made loses interest for us, and the relations
between objective anxiety and neurotic anxiety are clarified and simplified in a surprising way. And, besides this, it is to be noticed
that we now understand the apparently complicated cases of anxiety-formation better than we do those which seem to be simple.

We have recently investigated the manner in which anxiety comes about in certain phobias, which we class with anxiety-hysteria,
and we have chosen for investigation cases in which we have to deal with the typical repression of desires proceeding from the
Oedipus complex. We should have expected to find that it is the libidinal cathexis of the mother as object which, as a result of
repression, is transformed into anxiety, and now manifests itself in the form of a symptom as attached to the father-substitute. I
cannot tell you all the individual steps of an investigation of this kind; let it suffice to say that, to our astonishment, the result was the
reverse of what we had expected. It is not the repression that creates the anxiety, but the anxiety is there first and creates the
repression! But what sort of anxiety can it be? It can only be fear of a threatening external danger, that is to say, objective anxiety. It
is true that the boy is afraid of the demands of his libido, in this case of his love for his mother; so that this is really an instance of
neurotic anxiety. But this being in love seems to him to be an internal danger, which he must avoid by renouncing his object, only
because it involves an external danger-situation. And in every case we have investigated we have obtained the same result. It must,
however, be confessed that we were not prepared to find that the instinctual danger was only a half-way house to an external and
real danger-situation.

We have, however, not yet said what the real danger is that the child fears as a result of his being in love with his mother. It is the
punishment of castration, the loss of his penis. Naturally, you will object that after all that is not a real danger. Our boys are not
castrated because they are in love with their mothers during the phase of the Oedipus-complex. But the question cannot be so easily
dismissed. It is not primarily a matter of whether castration is really performed; what is important is that the danger is one that
threatens from without, and that the boy believes in it. He has some grounds for doing so, for, not infrequently, threats of his penis
being cut off are made during his phallic phase, at the time of his early masturbation; and no doubt allusions to such a punishment
will always find a phylogenetic reinforcement on his side. We have conjectured that, in the early days of the human family, castration
really was performed on the growing boy by the jealous and cruel father, and that circumcision, which is so frequently an element in
puberty rites, is an easily recognizable trace of it. We are aware of how far removed we are from the common point of view in saying
this, but we must maintain our position that fear of castration is one of the most frequent and one of the strongest motive forces of
repression, and therefore of the formation of neuroses. The analysis of cases in which, it is true, not castration itself, but
circumcision, has been performed on boys as a cure or as a punishment for masturbation (a thing which was by no means of rare
occurrence in English and American society) has provided us with conclusive proof that we are right. It is a great temptation at this
juncture to go further into the castration-complex, but we will keep to our subject. Fear of castration is naturally not the only motive
for repression; to start with, it has no place in the psychology of women; they have, of course, a castration complex, but they cannot
have any fear of castration. In its place, for the other sex, is found fear of the loss of love, obviously a continuation of the fear of the
infant at the breast when it misses its mother. You will understand what objective danger-situation is indicated by this kind of anxiety.
If the mother is absent or has withdrawn her love from the child, it can no longer be certain that its needs will be satisfied, and may
be exposed to the most painful feelings of tension. There is no need to reject the idea that these conditions for anxiety
fundamentally repeat the situation of the original birth-anxiety, which, to be sure, also implied separation from the mother. Indeed, if
you follow a line of thought suggested by Ferenczi, you may add fear of castration, too, to this series, for the loss of the male genital
organ-results-In--the impossibility of a reunion with the mother, or with a substitute for her, in the sexual act. I might mention,
incidentally, that the common phantasy of returning into the womb is a substitute for this desire for coitus. There are still a great
number of interesting and surprising facts which I might tell you about in this connection; but I must not step beyond the bounds of
an introduction to psychoanalysis. I will, therefore, merely draw your attention to the way in which, at this point, the findings of
psychology take us to the frontiers of biological fact.



54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, esp 841b-d

I devoted one lecture in my former series—the twenty-fifth—to the study of anxiety. I must recapitulate its contents in brief. We said
then that anxiety is an affective condition— that is to say, a combination of certain feelings of the pleasure-pain series with their
corresponding efferent innervations, and a perception of them—but we asserted that anxiety is prob ably also the trace of a certain
important event, taken over by inheritance, and therefore comparable to the ontogenetically acquired hysterical attack. We
suggested that the event which left this affective trace behind it was the process of birth, in which the modifications of the heart's
action and of respiration, which are characteristic of anxiety, served a useful purpose. The first anxiety of all would thus have been a
toxic one. We then started from the distinction between objective anxiety and neurotic anxiety, the former being what seems to us
an intelligible reaction to danger—that is, to anticipated injury from without—and the latter altogether puzzling and, as it were,
purposeless. In our analysis of objective anxiety we explained it as a condition of increased sensory attention and motor tension,
which we called anxiety-preparedness. Out of this the anxiety-reaction arises. The anxiety-reaction may run one of two courses.
Either the anxiety development, the repetition of the old traumatic experience, is restricted to a signal, in which case the rest of the
reaction can adapt itself to the new situation of danger, whether by flight or defence; or the old experience gets the upper hand, and
the whole reaction exhausts itself in anxiety-development, in which case the affective state is paralyzing and un-adapted to the
present situation.

We then turned our attention to neurotic anxiety, and pointed out that it could be observed in three forms. Firstly, we have free
floating, general apprehensiveness, ready to attach itself for the time being to any new possibility that may arise in the form of what
we call expectant dread, as happens, for instance, in the typical anxiety-neurosis. Secondly, we find it firmly attached to certain ideas,
in what are known as phobias, in which we can still recognize a connection with external danger, but cannot help regarding the
anxiety felt towards it as enormously exaggerated. Thirdly and finally, we have anxiety as it occurs in hysteria and in other severe
neuroses; this anxiety either accompanies symptoms or manifests itself independently, whether as an attack or as a condition which
persists for some time, but always without having any visible justification in an external danger. We then asked ourselves two
questions: "What are people afraid of when they have neurotic anxiety?" and: "How can one bring this kind of anxiety into line with
objective anxiety felt towards an external danger?"

Our investigations were by no means unsuccessful, and we succeeded in reaching a few important conclusions. With regard to
anxious expectation, clinical experience has taught us that there is a regular relationship between it and the disposition of the libido
in the sexual life. The most frequent cause of anxiety-neurosis is undischarged excitation. A libidinal excitation is aroused, but is: not
satisfied or used; in the place of this libido which has been diverted from its use, anxiety makes its appearance. I even thought it was
justifiable to say that this unsatisfied libido is directly transformed into anxiety. This view found some support in certain almost
universal phobias of small children. Many of these phobias are altogether enigmatic, but others, such as the fear of being left alone
and the fear of unfamiliar people, can be definitely explained. Being left alone or seeing strange faces stirs up the child's longing for
the familiar presence of its mother; it cannot control this libidinal excitation; it cannot keep it in a state of suspension, but turns it
into anxiety. This anxiety in children, therefore, is not objective anxiety, but must be classed among the neurotic anxieties. Children's
phobias, and the anxious expectation in anxiety-neurosis, serve as two examples of one way in which neurotic anxiety comes about;
i.e., through direct transformation of libido. In a moment we shall learn of a second method, and we shall see that it is not so very
different from the first.
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 848b-849b

So far all this has been mere recapitulation. And you must not suppose that the things which I have omitted to mention this time no
longer hold true. This recapitulation was necessary so that we could have a starting-point for our account of the further advance in
our knowledge. We can flatter ourselves that we have obtained a great deal of new information precisely about this matter of the
early organizations of the libido and that we have a better understanding of what we already knew—in proof of which I will give you
a few instances. In 1924, Abraham showed that we can differentiate two stages in the sadistic-anal phase. In the former of these the
destructive tendencies to annihilate and to get rid of things have the upper hand, while in the latter those tendencies predominate
which are friendly to the object, and seek to possess things and hold them fast In the middle of this phase, then, there appears for
the first time a consideration for the object which is a forerunner of a later relation of love towards the object. We are equally
justified in assuming a similar subdivision in the first or oral phase. In the earlier stage of it, we only have oral incorporation, and
there is no ambivalence in the relation to the object, i.e., the mother's breast. The second stage, which is distinguished by the onset
of biting activities, may be called the oral-sadistic stage. It is here that we get the first manifestations of ambivalence, which become
so much more obvious in the next, or sadistic-anal phase. The value of these new differentiations becomes especially clear when we
want to discover the predispositional points of the libidinal development in the case of certain neuroses—such as obsessional
neurosis and melancholia. I need only recall to you here what we have learnt on the subject of fixation of libido, predisposition, and
regression.

Our attitude to the phases of libidinal organization has in general altered somewhat. We used formerly to emphasize the way in
which one phase gives place tb the next; nowadays, we direct our attention more to the facts which indicate how much of each
earlier phase per sists side by side with, and behind, later organizations, and obtains permanent representation in the economy of
the libido and in the character of the individual. Even more important are those investigations which have shown us how frequently
under pathological conditions regression to earlier phases takes place, and that certain regressions are characteristic of certain forms
of illness. I cannot, however, go into that question here; it is a matter for a specialized treatise on the psychology of the neuroses.

We have been able to study the transformation of instincts and similar processes, especially with reference to anal-erotism, in which
the impulses have their source in the erotogenic anal zone, and we are surprised to find the multiplicity of the channels along which
these instinctual impulses can be directed. It is, perhaps, not easy to free oneself from the contemptuous attitude which we have
come to adopt towards this particular zone during the course of our development. It is as well, therefore, to bear in mind Abraham's
reminder that embryologically the anus corresponds to the primitive mouth, which has moved down to the end of the bowel. It
appears, then, that when, in the course of development, the individual comes to feel disfavour for his own faeces or excrement, his
instinctual interest arising from anal sources passes over to objects which can be given away as gifts. And rightly so, for faeces were
the first gift that the infant could make, and he parted with them out of love for the person who looked after him. Subsequently, the
old interest in faeces turns into an appreciation of gold and money, and also makes a contribution to the affective cathexis attaching
to the ideas of child and penis. It is the view of all children, who, as we know, cling to the cloaca-theory for a long time, that babies
are born out of the bowel, like a piece of faeces; defecation is the prototype of the act of birth. But the penis, too, has its forerunner
in the column of feaces, which fills the mucous mem brane tube of the bowel and stimulates it. When the child has unwillingly
imbibed the knowledge that there are human beings who do not possess a penis, that organ seems to him something which can be
detached from the body, and an unmistakable analogy is drawn between it and the excrement which was the first piece of bodily
substance that had to be given up. A large quantity of anal-erotism is thus transferred to the cathexis of the penis. But the interest in
that part of the body has, besides an anal-erotic basis, a perhaps even more powerful root in oral erotism; for in accordance with the
situation of sucking, the penis derives a great deal from the nipple of the mother's breast.

It is impossible to have any understanding of people's phantasies, or of associations which occur under the influence of the
unconscious, or of the language of symptoms, if one does not know about these deep-lying connections. On this level, faeces-
money-gift-child-penis are taken as having the same meaning, and can be represented by the same symbols. You must not forget
that I can only give you very in complete information on the subject. I will, however, add in passing that the late awakening interest in
the vagina is mainly of anal-erotic derivation. This is not to be wondered at, since the vagina is, in the admirable phrase of Lou
Andreas-Salome, "hired out" from the rectum; and in the lives of homosexuals, who have not got beyond a certain stage in their
sexual development, the vagina is once more represented by the anus. In dreams we often meet with a place which was formerly a
single room, but is now divided into two by a partition wall, or vice versa. This always refers to the relation of the vagina to the
rectum. We can also follow very clearly the way in which in a girl, the entirely unfeminine desire for the possession of a penis
normally turns into the desire for a child, and then for a man as the bearer of the penis and the giver of the child, so that in this case,
too, we can see how an element of what was originally an anal-erotic interest is taken up into the later genital organization.
In the course of these studies of the pregenital phases of the libido, we have gleaned some new pieces of information about the
formation of character. We have been made aware of a triad of characteristics which are almost always to be found together:
orderliness, parsimoniousness, and obstinacy, and we have concluded from the analysis of persons possessing them that these
characteristics proceed from the dissipation of their anal-erotism and its employment in other ways. Where this remarkable
combination is to be found, therefore, we speak of an anal character, and in a sense contrast it with unmodified anal-erotism. A
similar arid perhaps even firmer connection is to be found between ambition and urethral erotism. We have found a remarkable
reference to this correlation in the legend that Alexander the Great was born on the same night that a certain Herostratus, from a
craving for notoriety, set fire to the famous temple of Artemis at Ephesus. It seems that the ancients were well aware of the
connection involved. You already know how close a connection there is between urination and fire and the putting out of fire.
Naturally, we expect to find that other traits of character will also turn out to be derived from pregenital libidinal formations, either
as precipitates or as reaction-formations; but we cannot as yet demonstrate this.



54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 852a-b

But how can this conservative quality of instincts help us to understand the self-destructive tendency? What is the earlier state of
things that such an instinct is trying to rein state? Now the answer to this question lies near at hand, and opens up a wide vista of
possibilities. If it is true that once in an inconceivably remote past, and in an unimaginable way, life arose out of inanimate matter,
then, in accordance with our hypothesis, an instinct must at that time have come into being, whose aim it was to abolish life once
more and to reestablish the inorganic state of things. If in this instinct we recognize the impulse to self destruction of our hypothesis,
then we can regard that impulse as the manifestation of a death instinct, which can never be absent in any vital process. And now
the instincts in which we believe separate themselves into two groups; the erotic instincts, which are always trying to collect living
substance together into ever larger unities, and the death instincts which act against that tendency, and try to bring living matter
back into an inorganic condition. The co-operation and opposition of these two forces produce the phenomena of life to which death
puts an end.

You will perhaps shrug your shoulders and say: That is not natural science, that is the philosophy of Schopenhauer. But, Ladies and
Gentlemen, why should not a bold thinker have divined something that a sober and painstaking investigation of details subsequently
con firms? And after all, everything has been said already, and many people said the same thing before Schopenhauer. And besides,
what we have said is not even true Schopenhauer. We do not assert that death is the only aim of life; we do not overlook the
presence of life by the side of death. We recognize two fundamental instincts, and ascribe to each of them its own aim. How the two
mingle in the vital process, how the death instinct is pressed into the service of Eros, especially when it is turned outwards in the
form of aggressiveness—these are problems which remain for future investigation. We can go no further than the point at which this
prospect opens up before us. The question whether all instincts without exception do not possess a conservative character, whether
the erotic instincts also do not seek the reinstatement of an earlier state of things, when they strive towards the synthesis of living
substance into larger wholes—this question, too, must be left unanswered.
